---
layout: post
title: Elvis
published: true
date: 2022-07-22
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Biopic, Drama, Music]
metadata: 'Australia/USA 2022, 159 mins<br> Director: Baz Luhrmann'
pdf: '2022-07-22-elvis.pdf'
---

_There must be lights burning brighter somewhere  
Got to be birds flying higher in a sky more blue  
If I can dream of a better land  
Where all my brothers walk hand in hand  
Tell me why, oh why, oh why can’t my dream come true  
Oh why…_

‘While this story is called _Elvis_, it’s also Colonel Tom Parker’s story—the telling of it at least; he’s our way in, our narrator, and an unreliable one at that,’ states writer/director/producer Baz Luhrmann, whose extensive research into the music icon Elvis aided in his discovery of the strange partnership behind the artist’s public success and personal struggles. ‘As I like to say, Colonel Tom Parker was never a colonel, never a Tom, never a Parker, but a fascinating character all the same. He was a carnival barker dedicated to finding that one great act.

‘Nineteen-year-old Elvis Presley had lived for a period of time in one of the few white-designated houses in a Black section of Tupelo, Mississippi,’ the filmmaker continues, ‘where, along with a group of neighbourhood friends, he absorbed the music of both the local juke joints and the Pentecostal revival tents. As he grew up, he fused this with his love of country music. Parker had no ear for music whatsoever, but he was absolutely struck by the effect Elvis’s whole package had on young audiences. As the Colonel says in the film, “It was the greatest carnival act I had ever seen”.’

Lurhmann further adds that, ‘In the mid-1950s in parts of America, carnivals were transitioning into music, mainly country and western. But Parker was always looking for the extraordinary—the one that made the most money, had a great costume, excited the audience, had a strange twist… Just something special, like Elvis.’

Luhrmann recruited Oscar winner Tom Hanks to play the role of Parker, stating, ‘I’d never worked with Tom previously, but I just told him the story and before I even got to the video I’d brought along to show him what I had in mind, he said, “Well, if you want me I’m your guy.” What a gift!’

Hanks has said of the real-life Parker, ‘He was both a genius and a scoundrel. He was a very disciplined man, a wicked smart businessman and a dime-squeezing skinflint, but also a pioneer in a big type of show business that did not exist until Elvis Presley came along. He knew instantaneously that Elvis was a unique artist, he saw his grand potential and knew that if he didn’t make a ton of money off him, somebody else would.’

As Luhrmann reveals in the film, money was a key motivator and, as such, Parker was also possibly the first person to see the financial potential beyond the music: merchandising. ‘He sees how this boy, Elvis, has an effect on an audience, an effect like he’s never seen before and certainly beyond anything he’s seen on the carnival circuit,’ the filmmaker notes. ‘To Tom Parker, it’s the greatest carnival act he’s ever witnessed, and he must have it.’

To bring to life the man whose electrifying art and image have permeated the four corners of the world for more than six decades, the filmmakers conducted an extensive search before coming across Austin Butler. Says Luhrmann, ‘I knew I couldn’t make this film if the casting wasn’t absolutely right, and we searched thoroughly for an actor with the ability to evoke the singular natural movement and vocal qualities of this peerless star, but also the inner vulnerability of the artist. I had heard about Austin Butler from his stand-out role opposite Denzel Washington in _The Iceman Cometh_ on Broadway, and then I got a call from Denzel, whom I do not know, going out of his way to state that this young actor had a work ethic like no one else he had seen before. Through a journey of extensive screen testing and music and performance workshops, I knew unequivocally that I had found someone who could embody the spirit of one of the world’s most iconic musical figures.’

Butler offers, ‘What always fascinates me about any icon is the fact that they’re first and foremost human. Elvis was the first of his kind, in a way – a kid who comes from absolutely nothing and then becomes the most famous man on the planet. It’s the American dream. He also embodied so many eras that it feels like he lived 100 years; it’s amazing that he was only here for 42.’

Luhrmann’s producing team on _Elvis_ consisted of his long-time collaborator Catherine Martin who, as she has since they teamed up for the director’s inaugural feature _Strictly Ballroom_, also headed up the production and costume designs, as well as veteran producer Gail Berman of the Jackal Group, Patrick McCormick, and Schuyler Weiss.

Martin relates, ‘Baz has always been interested in Elvis so this had been kind of percolating in the background before really coming into focus for us a few years ago. I think I always admired the way that Elvis brought meaning to songs through the quality of his voice. I understood his cultural importance but once Baz related his vision for the film to me, I realised that Elvis’s rise to fame was like Icarus flying towards the sun, an extremely poignant and operatic cautionary tale showing the exploitation of fame at all costs.’

Berman states, ‘This film is much more than a biopic; we owe that to Baz’s deep understanding and appreciation of Elvis not just as a human, but also as a captivating, epic figure through which to tell the story of America. Baz himself is uniquely capable of telling a story that is gripping on its surface while exploring deeper, resonant truths. Elvis’ story is packed with so much more than many people know, and Baz, with his unmistakable style and mastery of both film and music, is really the only artist I know who could bring this life to the screen.’  
**Production notes**  

**ELVIS**  
_Directed by_: Baz Luhrmann  
_©_: Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.  
_A_ Bazmark _production_  
_A_ Jackal Group _production_  
_A_ Warner Bros. Pictures _presentation_  
_Executive Producers_: Toby Emmerich, Courtenay Valenti, Kevin McCormick  
_Produced by_: Baz Luhrmann, Catherine Martin, Gail Berman, Patrick McCormick, Schuyler Weiss  
_Unit Production Manager_: Anne Bruning, Patrick McCormick  
_Financial Controller_: Jeremy Atcliffe  
_Production Accountant_: Prue Williams  
_Supervising Location Manager_: Lauren Cooper  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Henry Karjalainen  
_Casting by_: Denise Chamian, Nikki Barrett  
_Screenplay by_: Baz Luhrmann, Sam Bromell, Craig Pearce, Jeremy Doner  
_Story by_: Baz Luhrmann, Jeremy Doner  
_Director of Photography_: Mandy Walker  
_A Camera Operator_: Jason Ellson  
_B Camera Operator_: Jay Torta  
_Steadicam Operator_: Jason Ellson  
_Stills Photographer_: Hugh Stewart  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: Tom Wood  
_Visual Effects by_: Rising Sun Pictures, Method Studios, Luma, Mr X  
_Visual Effects & Opticals by_: FIN Design+Effects  
_Visual Effects by_: Cumulus, Future Associate, Resin, Double Barrell, Slate, Mist Studio, Motion Associates, The Avatar Factory, Hollywood Visual Effects  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Brian Cox  
_Edited by_: Matt Villa, Jonathan Redmond  
_Production Designers_: Catherine Martin, Karen Murphy  
_Supervising Art Director_: Ian Gracie  
_Set Decorator_: Bev Dunn  
_Costume Designer_: Catherine Martin  
_Hair and Make-up Designer_: Shane Thomas  
_Main Titles by_: Inc. Devastudios  
_End Titles by_: The Post Lounge  
_Music by_: Elliott Wheeler  
_Score Conducted by_: Cliff Masterson  
_Music Supervisor_: Anton Monsted  
_Choreography_: Polly Bennett  
_Sound Design_: Wayne Pashley  
_Production Sound Mixer_: David Lee  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Andy Nelson, Michael Keller  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Wayne Pashley  
_Publicist_: Fiona Searson  
_Digital Intermediate and Digital Dailies by_: The Post Lounge  
_Filmed at_: Village Roadshow Studios  

**Cast**  
Austin Butler _(Elvis Presley)_  
Tom Hanks _(Colonel Tom Parker)_  
Olivia DeJonge _(Priscilla)_  
Helen Thomson _(Gladys)_  
Richard Roxburgh _(Vernon)_  
Kelvin Harrison Jr _(B.B. King)_  
David Wenham _(Hank Snow)_  
Kodi Smit-McPhee _(Jimmie Rodgers Snow)_  
Luke Bracey _(Jerry Schilling)_  
Dacre Montgomery _(Steve Binder)_  
Leon Ford _(Tom Diskin)_  
Gary Clark Jr _(Arthur ‘Big Boy’ Crudup)_  
Yola _(Sister Rosetta Tharpe)_  
Natasha Bassett _(Dixie Locke)_  
Xavier Samuel _(Scotty Moore)_  
Adam Dunn _(Bill Black)_  
Alton Mason _(Little Richard)_  
Shonka Dukureh _(Big Mama Thornton, Pentecostal singer)_  

Australia-USA 2022  
159 mins  

**A Warner Bros release**  

**NEW RELEASES**  
**Nitram**  
From Fri 1 Jul  
**Wayfinder**  
From Fri 1 Jul  
**Brian and Charles**  
From Fri 8 Jul  
**Elvis**  
From Fri 22 Jul  
**Kurt Vonnegut: Unstuck in Time**  
From Fri 22 Jul  
**Hit the Road (Jaddeh Khaki)**  
From Fri 29 Jul  
**The Feast**  
From Fri 19 Aug  
**Where Is Anne Frank**  
From Fri 19 Aug  
**Queen of Glory**  
From Fri 28 Aug  

**RE-RELEASES**  
**The Big City (Mahanagar)**  
From Fri 22 Jul  
**Alice in the Cities (Alice in den Städten)**  
From Fri 15 Jul  
**The Harder They Come**  
From Fri 5 Aug (+ intro by season curator and author Lloyd Bradley on Fri 5 Aug 18:15)  
**Burning an Illusion**  
From Fri 19 Aug  
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
