---
layout: post
title: Blade Runner 2049
published: true
date: 2021-09-04
readtime: true
categories: ['DENIS VILLENEUVE<br> THE PATH TO DUNE']
tags: [Drama, Sci-Fi, Action]
metadata: 'USA 2017, 164 mins<br> Director: Denis Villeneuve'
pdf: '2021-09-04-blade-runner-2049.pdf'
---

It would be almost impossible to list the ways in which Ridley Scott’s _Blade Runner_ (1982) has impacted science fiction filmmaking. Adapted from Philip K. Dick’s novel _Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?_ (1968), it was certainly a touchstone for the French-Canadian director Denis Villeneuve. ‘I saw this movie maybe 50 times,’ he says. ‘It’s definitely the movie I saw the most in my life.’ Now he’s been given the daunting mission of delivering the sequel, _Blade Runner 2049_.

His appointment feels well-earned after a quartet of critically admired English-language films – _Prisoners_ (2013), _Enemy_ (2013), _Sicario_ (2015) and _Arrival_ (2016) – have positioned him as one of Hollywood’s most ‘visionary’ directors.

_You were 14 when Blade Runner came out. What impact did it have on you?_

It was something I was deeply looking for: someone who would take sci-fi seriously. In literature, it’s a serious genre: there was Isaac Asimov, Frank Herbert, Arthur C. Clarke. But in movies, sci-fi was very much approached as a B-movie genre – with the exception of Stanley Kubrick’s _2001_ [_A Space Odyssey_, 1968]. They were always clumsy or badly done. For me, _Blade Runner_ is one of those rare gems in film history where a true artist decided to make a real sci-fi movie.

_Unlike_ Alien, _a franchise begun by Scott that has seen numerous sequels and spin-offs, this is the first film to follow_ Blade Runner. _Was that a concern for you?_

Yes. I was afraid of looking like a vandal with paint in a church! I will say there was a huge freedom coming from the fact that I was the first one [to make a sequel]. I remember a conversation I had with Ryan Gosling right at the start, where we both agreed that our chances of success were very small, that what we were trying to do was insane. Once we made peace with that, it gave us a lot of freedom. We said, ‘We’re going to do a pure artistic gesture.’ Like a painter. We will give everything and try to do our best, and after that we know that people will judge us and condemn us, and will compare us to a masterpiece – no matter how good the movie is.

_Beyond his input at script stage, what involvement did Ridley Scott have?_

He was at the birth of the project: the main ideas, the main characters, the art of the film, is from him. From him and Hampton Fancher. Then Michael Green came on board. So Ridley was there a lot, from an influence point of view. It’s his screenplay. Then I made the movie my own. I would not have been able to work with him behind me. You cannot work with the master; it would be unbearable… but he was very generous with me. The man allowed me to play in his dreams.

_You worked with cinematographer Roger Deakins on_ Prisoners _and_ Sicario. _How was your collaboration with him here?_

Roger is a painter and also a very strong storyteller. He was my closest and strongest collaborator. Roger was part of this project since day zero. One of the most important moments in the filmmaking process for me is the dream moment, when you find images inside you that will fuel the movie. Usually I do it alone; but for this movie I said, ‘Listen, I’m shooting in 18 months. I need help.’ And I brought in Roger right from the start. As I was editing _Arrival_, Roger came to Montreal and we spent several weeks together there drawing the movie. He was there full-time, with storyboard artists. We spent hours and hours… and basically in that period, we rewrote and designed most of the movie – the buildings, the vehicles, and we made a lot of decisions about the laws of the universe that we were going to use. We did a lot of visual research. For me, it was one of the most exciting periods. It was paradise to be with Roger alone, and the movie was born there.

_How did you set out to design the film? The images seen so far – such as the deserts of Las Vegas – are different to the original_ Blade Runner, _and yet feel completely of that world._

I’m so happy you’re saying this because it was very tricky. The thing is, I was very secure when we were in the same neighbourhood as Deckard. When we were evolving the film noir aesthetic, when we were in the streets of LA, in the darkness, in the smog… it was a world that was exciting and yet I felt secure. I knew I was in the _Blade Runner_ universe. When we stepped out of that neighbourhood, when we were trying to go more on the outskirts of Los Angeles and trying to explore new territories, I felt a huge responsibility and it was frightening for me to try as much as possible to stay in the dystopian, urban landscape and create something that will still be a part of the _Blade Runner_ world.

_In_ Blade Runner, _the backdrops showed major brands like the now virtually defunct Atari. And yet you have continued using this in the design of the cityscapes. What was your thinking?_

I think Atari almost disappeared at one point; it went bankrupt and then it came back recently. There was something in the first movie that was quite powerful… you were seeing real companies, real brands, and that made a link with our reality and it made the movie feel real. The movie is filled with names and brands everywhere and we did the same, but I insisted that we use mostly companies that are part of the first movie, and most of them are dead right now – like Pan Am. Atari was important to me because it was a company that was linked with that era, that period of time, and it’s part of the aesthetic of the first movie. A lot of graphic design is inspired by Atari video games; the spirit of the 80s is very present in the film.

Blade Runner _is sometimes said to be the last great special-effects film before the arrival of CGI. What was your approach for the sequel?_

There are three movies where the VFX are astonishing: _2001_, _Close Encounters of the Third Kind_ and _Blade Runner_ – all with effects by Douglas Trumbull. He is the master – a strong genius. Those special effects have never been bettered. Honestly, Roger Deakins and I – our goal as we were doing our movie, with all the CGI and all the technology, was to try to honour the strength of the first movie. We were saying to ourselves that 35 years on we are struggling to achieve just the beginning of the quality of what they’ve done. Even today it’s still difficult to achieve that.

_Does_ Blade Runner 2049 _continue pursuing themes of the world on the verge of environmental collapse?_

I would say that it’s in the background: the sub-story. Like in the first one, the story is set in a world where the environment and eco-system has collapsed, where there was a major change in the climate and the earth is slowly dying. Like in the novel, like in the first movie, it’s just getting worse. People are trying to get out of there as much as possible.

_Ridley Scott says_ Blade Runner _was all about paranoia. Again, are you focusing on that?_

That inner paranoia, that inner doubt, that existential paranoia, is still in the movie. The new movie has a totally different story with very similar themes.<br>
**Denis Villeneuve interviewed by James Mottram, _Sight & Sound_, November 2017**<br>



**BLADE RUNNER 2049**<br>
_Directed by_: Denis Villeneuve  
_©_: LLC Alcon Entertainment  
_Production Company_: Alcon Entertainment  
_In association with_: Torridon Films, 16:14 Entertainment  
_Presented by_: Alcon Entertainment  
_In association with_: Columbia Pictures  
_With the participation of_: Canadian Film or Video Production Services Tax Credit  
_The filmmakers acknowledge the assistance of_: New Zealand Government’s Screen Production Grant  
_This film benefited from_: French Tax Rebate for International Productions  
_Executive Producers_: Ridley Scott, Bill Carraro, Tim Gamble, Frank Giustra, Yale Badik, Val Hill  
_Co-executive Producers_: Ian McGloin, Asa Greenberg  
_Produced by_: Andrew A. Kosove, Broderick Johnson, Bud Yorkin, Cynthia Sikes Yorkin  
_Co-producers_: Carl O. Rogers, Dana Belcastro, Steven P. Wegner  
_Associate Producer_: Donald L. Sparks  
_Unit Production Manager_: Bill Carraro  
_Production Manager Hungary_: Miklós Tóth  
_Production Supervisor_: Gavin J. Behrman  
_Supervising Location Manager_: Emma Pill  
_Senior Location Manager_: András Rudolf  
_Location Manager_: Zsolt Molnár  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Brad Arensman  
_Production Consultant_: Des Carey  
_2nd Unit Director_: Joel Kramer  
_1st Assistant Director_: Donald L. Sparks  
_Script Supervisor_: Jessica Clothier  
_Casting_: Francine Maisler  
_UK/European Casting by_: Lucinda Syson  
_Hungary Casting by_: Zsolt Csutak  
_Screenplay by_: Hampton Fancher, Michael Green  
_Story by_: Hampton Fancher  
_Based on characters from the novel_ Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? _by_: Philip K. Dick  
_Director of Photography_: Roger A. Deakins  
_2nd Unit Director of Photography_: Pierre Gill  
_A Camera Operator_: Roger A. Deakins  
_Steadicam Operator_: Pete Cavaciuti  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: John Nelson  
_Visual Effects by_: Double Negative, FrameStore, MPC, BUF, Universal Production Partners, Rodeo FX, Atomic Fiction  
_Miniature Effects and Photography by_: Weta Workshop Limited  
_Previsualisation by_: MPC  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Gerd Nefzer  
_Editor_: Joe Walker  
_Production Designer_: Dennis Gassner  
_Supervising Art Director_: Paul Inglis  
_Senior Art Director_: Rod McLean  
_Art Directors_: David Doran, Bence Erdelyi, Tibor Lázár, Stefan Speth  
_Concept Designer_: Sam Hudecki  
_Storyboard Artist_: Sam Hudecki  
_Costume Designer_: Renée April  
_Head of Department Make-up Designer_: Donald Mowat  
_Special Effects Make-up Artist_: Jason M. Collins  
_Hair Designer_: Kerry Warn  
_Main and End Title Design by_: Prodigal Pictures, Danny Yount  
_Music by_: Benjamin Wallfisch, Hans Zimmer  
_Synth Design_: Howard Scarr  
_Vocalist_: Avi Kaplan  
_Exotic Instruments_: Chas Smith  
_Cello/Vocals_: Tristan Schulze  
_Cello_: Simone Vitucci  
_Solo Bass_: Nico Abondolo  
_Guitars_: Owen Gurry  
_Music Supervisors_: Deva Anderson, Theo Green  
_Synth Programming_: Hans Zimmer  
_Choreographer_: Viktória Jaross  
_Sound Designer_: Theo Green  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Mac Ruth  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Ron Bartlett, Doug Hemphill  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Mark Mangini  
_Supervising Stunt Co-ordinator_: Joel Kramer  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Mike Massa  
_Stunt Co-ordinator Hungary_: Domonkos Párdányi<br>

**Cast**<br>
Ryan Gosling _(KD6-3.7, ‘K’)_  
Harrison Ford _(Rick Deckard)_  
Ana de Armas _(Joi)_  
Sylvia Hoeks _(Luv)_  
Robin Wright _(Lieutenant Joshi)_  
Mackenzie Davis _(Mariette)_  
Carla Juri _(Dr Ana Stelline)_  
Lennie James _(Mister Cotton)_  
Sean Young _(Rachael)_  
Edward James Olmos _(Gaff)_  
Dave Bautista _(Sapper Morton)_  
Jared Leto _(Niander Wallace)_  
Barkhad Abdi _(Doc Badger)_  
Hiam Abbass _(Freysa)_  
Wood Harris _(Nandez)_  
David Dastmalchian _(Coco)_

USA 2017<br>
164 mins<br>
<br>
**DENIS VILLENEUVE: THE PATH TO DUNE**<br>
**Blade Runner 2049**<br>
Sat 4 Sep 20:00; Sat 18 Sep 17:15; Fri 24 Sep 14:15; Sun 3 Oct 17:30<br>
**Maelström**<br>
Mon 6 Sep 18:15; Fri 17 Sep 20:55<br>
**Polytechnique**<br>
Fri 10 Sep 21:20; Sun 19 Sep 12:15; Thu 30 Sep 20:50<br>
**Incendies**<br>
Sat 11 Sep 20:30; Fri 17 Sep 17:50; Sun 19 Sep 14:45<br>
**Enemy**<br>
Sun 12 Sep 12:20; Tue 21 Sep 20:55<br>
**Sicario**<br>
Sun 12 Sep 18:10; Wed 22 Sep 20:40; Sat 25 Sep 20:40<br>
**Prisoners**<br>
Tue 14 Sep 14:15; Sat 25 Sep 17:00<br>
**August 32nd on Earth (Un 32 août sur terre)**<br>
Thu 16 Sep 18:20<br>
**Arrival**<br>
Thu 16 Sep 20:45; Tue 28 Sep 14:15; Sat 2 Oct 17:30<br>



**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking atBFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
