---
layout: post
title: WOMB
published: true
date: 2021-06-17
readtime: true
categories: ['BAGRI FOUNDATION LONDON INDIAN FILM FESTIVAL']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'India 2020, 102 mins<br> Director: Ajitesh Sharma'
pdf: '2021-06-17-womb.pdf'
---

_+ On stage Q&A with Srishti Bakshi and film critic Anna Smith._

_WOMB_ is a heart-wrenching and heart-warming narrative of the plight, dreams, rights and fight against all forms of violence that unify the women of today’s India. Where we share a common reality of living and navigating through an indefatigable patriarchal society. Through Srishti’s lens, we gain the privilege of discovering and understanding the WOMB, which deserves to be respected, empowered and protected. A perspective that stays at the fore of her on-foot journey of 3,800 km over 240 days, from Kanyakumari (South India) to Kashmir (North India).<br>
**womenofmybillion.com**

No one created history by following the usual path. Team CrossBow Miles, with Srishti Bakshi in the lead, embarked on a 3,800 km on-foot journey across India from Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu to Srinagar, Kashmir, mobilising communities to make India a safer country for girls and women by empowering them with digital and financial literacy. Srishti covered a distance of 30-35 km a day, meeting anywhere between 150-200 people a day, and followed the walk up with a workshop in the town or village she was passing through.

CrossBow Miles walked through Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab as well as J&K.

CrossBow Miles started with an ordinary girl who walked across a whole country, India, for girls and women, determined to sow the seeds of gender equality tells us how a single step can brew change on the ground.

Deeply shocked by a case reported from India, where a car with a family was stopped on the highway 91 and the mother and daughter were dragged away and gang-raped in front of the father and the brother, Srishti Bakshi decided not to be a silent spectator to rising crime against women in her country.

She left a thriving career just six years out from her management school, Indian School of Business (ISB) Hyderabad and her comfortable life in Hong Kong and started on the most unusual path.

In September 2017, Srishti, founder of the CrossBow Miles movement, embarked on a journey across India from Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu (South India) to Srinagar, Kashmir (North India), sensitising citizens to the gender-based violence and inequality in the country. The aim was to combat violence by empowering women with confidence, leadership skills and, most importantly, with digital and financial literacy that would allow them easy access to communication, information and financial independence.<br>
**womenofmybillion.com**
<br><br>

**WOMB (WOMEN OF MY BILLION)**<br>
_Director:_ Ajitesh Sharma<br>
_An_ Awedacious _original film_<br>
_In association with:_ CrossBow Miles, Hans Foundation<br>
_Executive Producer:_ Monisha Thyagarajan<br>
_Producer:_ Apoorva Bakshi<br>
_Co-producers:_ Pruviz Shroff, Gururaj Dixit<br>
_Assistant Director:_ Aparajita Sahay<br>
_Cinematography:_ Sabit Tisekar, Manas Tiwari, Prakhar Deep Jain, Kewal Karia<br>
_Editor:_ Karsh Jhavery<br>
_Colourist:_ Sidharth Meer<br>
_Original Score:_ Tajdar Junaid<br>
_Sound Design:_ Ateesh Chattopadhyay<br>

**With**<br>
Srishti Bakshi<br>
Pragya Prasun Singh<br>
Sangeeta Tiwari<br>
Neha Rai<br>

India 2020<br>
102 mins
<br><br><br>


**BAGRI FOUNDATION LONDON INDIAN FILM FESTIVAL**

**LIFF Opening Night: WOMB (Women of My Billion) + on stage Q&A with Srishti Bakshi and film critic Anna Smith**<br>
Thu 17 Jun 17:20<br>
**My Beautiful Laundrette** **+ on-stage interview with writer Hanif Kureishi**<br>
Fri 18 Jun 20:20<br>
**The Warrior + on-stage career interview with writer-director Asif Kapadia**<br>
Sat 19 Jun 20:30<br>
**Ahimsa: Gandhi the Power of the Powerless**<br>
Sun 20 Jun 15:00<br>
**Searching for Happiness…**<br>
Tue 22 Jun 20:50<br>
**Nazarband (Captive)**<br>
Wed 23 Jun 20:45<br>
**A’hr Kayattam**<br>
Thu 24 Jun 18:00<br>
**The Salt in Our Waters (Nonajoler Kabbo)**<br>
Sun 27 Jun 15:00<br>
<br><br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking atBFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

