---
layout: post
title: Head-On
published: true
date: 2021-07-11
readtime: true
categories: ['T A P E  PRESENTS<br> BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM &#63']
tags: [Drama, Romance]
metadata: 'Germany 2003, 121 mins<br> Director: Fatih Akin'
pdf: '2021-07-11-head-on.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING  The following notes give away some of the plot.**

After it took the top prizes at the 54th Berlinale and the 2004 European Film Awards, German/Turkish director Fatih Akin’s _Head-On_ was claimed by Germany and Turkey alike. German newspapers talked of ‘German cinema’ winning Berlin’s Golden Bear for the first time in 18 years, while the Turkish press celebrated the ‘great victory’ of ‘a Turkish filmmaker’. It was not difficult, however, to detect a sense of discomfort amid the applause. _Head-On_, after all, resists easy assimilation into the existing matrix of cultural stereotypes, and it is perhaps for this reason that most of the media coverage in both countries focused not so much on the film itself as on ‘juicy’ controversies involving the performers, notably lead actress  Sibel Kekilli’s previous appearances in porn videos.

But then _Head-On_ is not an easy film to pin down. Audiences seem to find it deeply unsettling, perhaps because it draws on cultural tropes that coexist in an eclectic and volatile disorder. _Head-On_ arguably belongs to a sub-genre that could be called the ‘hardcore love story’, a group of films whose mood is different from that of either romance or melodrama, despite some shared themes. There is always a doomed affair at the centre of such movies, but what transforms this commonplace into something extraordinary here is _Head-On_’s elusive atmosphere – an affective intensity, a concentration of desire and passion conveyed with utter conviction.  The ‘hardcore love story’ category might absorb such disparate titles as Bertolucci’s _Last Tango in Paris_ (1972), Fassbinder’s Sirkian (anti)melodrama  _Fear Eats the Soul_ (1974), Ettore Scola’s costume drama _Passion of Love_ (1981) and Wong Kar Wai’s _Happy Together_ (1997). _Head-On_ joins them less because of its storyline than because of its haunting tone.

Like Fatih Akin himself, the film’s two protagonists are members of the second generation of Turkish immigrants in Germany. Cahit (Birol Ünel) is a middle-aged loner who has a job collecting glasses in a rock club and spends the rest of his time fuelled by heavy doses of hard rock, alcohol and cocaine. At the film’s beginning, after a night spent at a bar, he drives his car at full speed into a wall.  In hospital he meets Sibel (Sibel Kekilli), an attractive young woman who has also tried to kill herself. After a brief encounter in the doctor’s waiting room, Sibel rushes after Cahit and asks him to marry her.

Despite Cahit’s initial refusal, it is obvious he is attracted to Sibel and will eventually say yes. She is desperate to escape the authority of her father and the brother who, we learn, broke her nose after seeing her with a boy. She chooses Cahit because he is Turkish, which means her family will accept him, but also because his cool looks suggest he will be unlikely to stop her from pursuing the independence she craves. After a series of farcical scenes of pre-nuptial arrangements, they marry. Sibel takes advantage of her newfound freedom from day one, storming out during a quarrel about Cahit’s former wife and spending the night with a guy she meets in a bar.

One refreshing element of _Head-On_ is its non-judgemental attitude to its female protagonist’s appetite for hedonism. What might otherwise be perceived as banal promiscuity is rendered here as a sincere and naive passion for living life to the full. The film conveys the sheer enjoyment Sibel derives from having her belly-button pierced, putting on sexy clothes, dancing at clubs, and sleeping with men she likes the look of. Meanwhile a subtle attraction builds between Sibel and Cahit, thwarted by a fundamental obstacle. Sibel cannot make love with Cahit, she explains, because this would make her truly his wife, so jeopardising her cherished independence.

This state of affairs is abruptly interrupted when Cahit unintentionally kills one of Sibel’s boyfriends after he has made insulting remarks about her. The mood of the film darkens as Cahit is imprisoned and Sibel recognises, at the very moment she loses him, how much she has been in love with Cahit: an instance of, to borrow cultural theorist Walter Benjamin’s phrase, ‘love at last sight’. As she mourns their relationship, she also realises that her brother might try to kill her to save the ‘family honour’. Before escaping to Istanbul, she pays a visit to Cahit; in their first truly intimate moment, she tells him she will wait for him.

In Istanbul we see a different Sibel. She cuts off her beautiful long hair and dons shabby, masculine clothes. Her expression is sober and depressed and she seems drained of all her energy and passion. She moves in with her female cousin Selma (Meltem Cumbul), an ambitious middle manager in a big hotel. For a while Sibel adopts a strictly conservative lifestyle, working as a chambermaid during the day and watching television in the evenings. In a letter to Cahit, she writes: ‘Istanbul is an energetic city full of life. I feel that I am the only lifeless thing in this city.’ But one night, driven mad by boredom, she walks down to the buzzing Beyoglu district in search of drugs. She soon falls into a self-destructive pattern like the one Cahit followed at the start of the film: now it is Sibel’s turn to run, as the German and Turkish titles of the film have it, ‘against the wall’ and crash.

Thus _Head-On_ is divided into two parts: first, a light-hearted Hamburg-set romantic black comedy, then a heavier, Istanbul-set tragedy. But though only the second half of the story actually takes place in Istanbul, images of that city pervade the film throughout.

Drawing on diverse cultural influences and challenging the notion of an authentic or fixed cultural identity, _Head-On_ poses questions about place, tradition and language. The Turkish-German characters shuttle between languages as the film moves locations; the conversations between Cahit and Sibel are striking more for their broken German. Time and again the switching of languages becomes an ironic, even subversive device. When Sibel is trying to convince Cahit to marry her, they argue loudly in German on a bus empty of other passengers. After Sibel declares that her family will accept Cahit because he’s Turkish, the bus stops and the driver, who turns out to be Turkish himself, starts yelling at them in Turkish to get out of his bus since he cannot stand ‘bastards like [them] who have no respect for their God and religion.’ Cahit coolly reminds him in German that this is not ‘his’ bus, but it belongs to the municipality. The driver gets increasingly furious.

A reverse scenario occurs in Istanbul when Cahit is looking for Sibel. Hiring a cab at the airport, he doesn’t know where to go, so tells the driver to cruise around for a while. The driver asks where he’s from and on learning that Cahit originates from Hamburg he delightedly switches to German, explaining that he lived in Munich for several years. Then when Cahit visits Selma and finds her reluctant to help him to track down Sibel, he moves from German to Turkish to try to express his feelings but is unable to do so, as if Turkish were a foreign language (or maybe as if Turkish were not foreign enough). So he switches to English, a language foreign to both of them. Yet during her prison visit, Sibel said in Turkish the words Cahit takes to his heart: ‘I will wait for you.’

_Head-On_ also shuttles between cultural codes. Having grown up in Germany with Turkish parents, the protagonists seem to feel equally (not) at home in either culture, quoting freely from both their Turkish and German cultural heritages.  Yet the film presents this not as a problem of non-belonging but rather as an opportunity to construct multiple belongings. Instead of portraying the experience of exile in terms of homelessness and loss, _Head-On_ emphasises its enabling side, what Edward Said called the ‘plurality of vision’ it offers.

Fatih Akin has said that his film has no ambition to ‘represent’ the Turkish minority in Germany. Instead, his protagonists are outsiders, ‘on a quest to find themselves.’ They seek to invent a new life, a new morality, and they pay a price for trying to do so. The film ends with the suggestion that for both of them the quest and the passion are ongoing. In the words of one Turkish pop song: ‘What would remain from the story, if there were not passion?’  
**Asuman Suner, _Sight & Sound_, March 2005**


**Sorry, My Somali Is Not Very Good**  
A young Somali woman has trouble with her mother tongue.
<br><br>


**SORRY, MY SOMALI IS NOT VERY GOOD**  
_Director:_ Warda Mohamed  
UK 2020  
2 mins

**HEAD-ON (GEGEN DIE WAND)**  
_Director_: Fatih Akin  
_©/Production Company_: Wüste Filmproduktion  
_©/In co-production with_: Corazón International, NDR - Norddeutscher Rundfunk  
_©/In association with_: Arte Deutschland  
_In association with_: FilmFörderung Hamburg,  FFA - Filmförderungsanstalt, NordMedia, BKM  
_World Sales_: Bavaria Film International  
_Producers_: Ralph Schwingel, Stefan Schubert  
_Co-producers_: Fatih Akin, Andreas Thiel,  Mehmet Kurtulus  
_Commissioning Editor (NDR)_: Jeanette Würl  
_Commissioning Editor (ARTE)_:  Andreas Schreitmüller  
_Line Producer (Turkish Unit)_: Ali Akdeniz  
_Key Unit Production Manager_: Jan Weber  
_Key Unit Production Manager (Turkish Unit)_: Muharrem Gülmez  
_Set Unit Production Manager_: Roman Brandt  
_Set Unit Production Manager (Turkish Unit)_:  Levent Öztekin  
_Production Manager_: Ingrid Holzapfel  
_Production Services in Turkey_: Panfilm  
_Production Accountant_: Uwe Grobecker  
_Production Accountant (Turkish Unit)_: Erhan Özogul  
_Location Manager (Turkish Unit)_: Menderes Demir  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Nicole Neumann  
_Artistic Advisor_: Andreas Thiel  
_Turkish Production Adviser_: Shermin Langhoff  
_Set Trainee_: Georgios Arvanitis  
_1st Assistant Director_: Andreas Thiel  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Nergis Usta  
_Script Supervisor_: Nergis Usta  
_Casting_: Mia Seck  
_Screenplay_: Fatih Akin  
_Director of Photography_: Rainer Klausmann  
_2nd Unit Photographer_: Christian Klopp  
_Chief Lighting Technician_: Torsten Lemke  
_Stills Photography_: Kerstin Stelter  
_Special Effects_: Peter Wiemker  
_Editor_: Andrew Bird  
_Art Director_: Tamo Kunz  
_Art Directors (Turkish Unit)_: Sirma Bradley,  Nergis Caliskan  
_Property Master (Exteriors)_: Beate Ter Schüren  
_Property Master (Interiors)_: Christoph Birth  
_Costumes_: Katrin Aschendorf  
_Make-up_: Daniel Schröder, Nursen Balci  
_Title Design_: Oliver Lammert  
_Opticals_: Roland Nethe  
_Colour Timer_: Jens Fischer  
_Music_: Selim Sesler und Orchester, Idil Üner, Maceo Parker und Band, Aytun Ede,  Fanfare Ciocarlia  
_Music Consultant_: Klaus Maeck  
_Sound Design_: Jörg Krieger, Nani Schumann  
_Sound Supervisor_: Martin Langenbach  
_Sound Recordist_: Kai Lüde  
_Sound Mixer_: Richard Borowski  
_Post-synchronization_: Richard Borowski  
_English Version_: Film und Video Undertitelung Gerhard Lehmann AG  
_English Version Subtitles_: Jeffrey A. McGuire  
_Fight Choreography_: Emanuel Bettencourt  
_Stunt Co-ordination_: Double Action, Ronnie Paul  
_Acting Coaches_: Mira Amari, Dieter Braun  
_Unit Publicist_: Meike Matthies

**Cast**  
Birol Ünel _(Cahit Tomruk)_  
Sibel Kekilli _(Sibel Güner)_  
Catrin Striebeck _(Maren)_  
Güven Kiraç _(Seref)_  
Meltem Cumbul _(Selma, cousin)_  
Zarah McKenzie _(waitress at factory)_  
Stefan Gebelhoff _(Nico)_  
Francesco Fiannaca _(man in bar)_  
Mona Mur _(Zoe Bar regular)_  
Ralph Misske _(psychiatric patient 1)_  
Philipp Baltus _(psychiatric patient 2)_  
Hermann Lause _(Dr Schiller)_  
Karin Niwiger _(cashier at pyschiatrist’s)_  
Demir Gökgöl _(Yunus Güner, father)_  
Cem Akin _(Yilmaz Güner, son)_  
Aysel Iscan _(Birsen Güner, mother)_  
Orhan Güner _(bus passenger)_  
Herr Tekin _(barber)_  
Andreas Thiel _(wedding official)_  
Adam Bousdoukos _(wedding barman)_  
Monique Akin _(customer at hair products store)_  
Marco Greiser _(man at disco)_  
Senol Ugurlu _(Shane)_  
Sileyman Kaplan _(Sly)_  
Hatun Kazci _(Hatice)_  
Canan Ata _(Canan)_  
Nurcan Esmertürk _(Nurcan)_  
Yilmaz Canan _(doorman 1)_  
Alma Ouglu Sahin _(doorman 2)_  
Cahit Aygüler _(thug)_  
Reinhold Schulz _(detention centre attendant)_  
Mehmet Kurtulus _(Istanbul barman)_  
Feridun Koç _(Osman 1)_  
Tulga Serim _(Osman 2)_  
Tugay Erverdi _(Osman 3)_  
Selim Erdogan _(taxi driver)_  
Tim Seyfi _(Bavarian taxi driver)_  
Misra Tomruk _(Pamuk, daughter)_

Germany 2003©  
121 mins
<br><br>

**T A P E PRESENTS: BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM?**<br>
**Burning an Illusion**<br>
Sat 3 Jul 14:20; Thu 8 Jul 17:45<br>
**While We Live (****Medan vi lever)**<br>
Sat 3 Jul 17:30; Tue 20 Jul 20:30<br>
**Binti**<br>
Sun 4 Jul 18:20; Mon 19 Jul 20:40<br>
**Eyimofe (This Is My Desire)**<br>
Fri 9 Jul 17:40<br>
**Pinky**<br>
Sat 10 Jul 20:50; Sat 24 Jul 11:40<br>
**Head-On (Gegen die Wand)**<br>
Sun 11 Jul 18:30; Tue 27 Jul 20:40<br>
**Black Girl (La noire de...)**<br>
Mon 12 Jul 18:20<br>
**The Namesake**<br>
Wed 14 Jul 17:40 (+ live spoken-word performance); Wed 21 Jul 20:40<br>
**What Will People Say (Hva vil folk si)**<br>
Fri 16 Jul 20:30; Sat 31 Jul 17:30<br>
**In Conversation with Nikesh Shukla**<br>
Fri 23 Jul 18:20<br>
**Lilting**<br>
Sat 24 Jul 17:20; Fri 30 Jul 20:40<br>
**Shoot the Messenger + Q&A with director Ngozi Onwurah, hosted by T A P E’s Angela Moneke**<br>
Thu 29 Jul 17:45<br>
**Culture Shock: Short Film Programme + Q&A with UNDR LNDN**<br>
Fri 30 Jul 17:40<br>

**T A P E** was founded in 2015 as a response to the lack of representation on screen.  
Find out more about this curatorial collective at **tapecollective.co.uk**
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTg4NzI1MjkyOF19
-->
