---
layout: post
title: Gunda
published: true
date: 2021-06-04
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES AND RE-RELEASES']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'USA/Norway, 2020, 93 mins<br> Director: Victor Kossakovsky'
pdf: '2021-06-04-gunda.pdf'
---
Where his prior film, the acclaimed epic _Aquarela_, was a reminder of the fragility of human tenure on earth, in _Gunda_, master filmmaker Victor Kossakovsky reminds us that we share our planet with billions of other animals. Through encounters with a mother sow (the eponymous Gunda), two ingenious cows, and a scene-stealing, one-legged chicken, Kossakovsky movingly recalibrates our moral universe, reminding us of the inherent value of life and the mystery of all animal consciousness, including our own.<br>
**gunda.movie**

Victor Kossakovsky’s new documentary, _Gunda_, follows on from the director’s previous film, the audiovisual collage exploring water’s might, mystery and majesty _Aquarela_ (2018), both as counterpoint and complement. Where _Aquarela_ revelled in the awe-inspiring grandeur and terrifying power of water, _Gunda_ luxuriates in the tranquil, day-to-day life of the eponymous sow and her piglets on a Norwegian farm. However, both films are aesthetically distinctive and experiential documents interested in examining humanity’s relationship with an element of the natural world.

In the case of _Gunda_, conversation surrounding the film has largely focused on the attachment of the famously vegan Joaquin Phoenix as an executive producer. It’s an understandable point of interest in discussion of a work that spends most of its 90-minute runtime endearing its subjects, a herd of farmyard pigs, to its audience, before reminding us, in no uncertain terms, of the pigs’ ultimate fate and purpose as livestock. In his 1977 essay _Why Look at Animals?_, the theorist and cultural historian John Berger lamented the shift – exacerbated by capitalist society – in our association with animals from being symbols, messengers and the subjects of the earliest human art, to mere providers of leather and meat. Berger’s writing feels like an appropriate touchstone for a film that seems to be attempting to redress that shift in some way, by genuinely placing the animal back in the centre of the frame.

The beautiful, crisp monochrome of the film’s images, captured by the director and Egil Haskjold Larsen, has several simultaneous effects. It helps to reduce the distraction that vibrant colours may have on the attention of the viewer which, as a result, remains on the pigs’ twitching snouts. Secondly, it plays on our familiarity with monochrome photography in two ways, by giving the film a timeless quality that we associate with black-and-white images and a mode that seems to draw out the most precise details.

This final point, and the adoption of the techniques of portraiture, seem to inform the film’s compositions. Aside from a brief sequence following some cattle in which the camera is more withdrawn, it typically remains low to the ground and in close proximity to its subjects, offering something akin to a pig’s-eye view. Similarly, the soundtrack is entirely natural, effectively field recordings of the local countryside, filled with birdsong. Both of these choices enhance the sense of verisimilitude in the film, creating the sensation that we are sitting alongside the pigs and, in some way, sharing a brief moment in their lives. The effect is helped by the complete absence of voiceover or contextual narration of any kind. In many instances, the more information we are given – the more we intellectually know about an animal – the more we are distanced from it or placed above it. By withholding this knowledge – indeed, that the sow is named Gunda and that she lives on a farm in Norway are facts gleaned from publicity materials rather than the film itself – we are brought ‘down’ to the pigs level, in a position of greater affinity and empathy.

However, the absence of narration, music and other devices that typically feature in cinema to guide the viewer is also what stops the film from tipping overtly into what Kossakovsky has referred to as ‘vegan propaganda.’ Although audience members with a certain pre-existing set of beliefs will take the film to be positing a clear and unwavering message to meat-eating society – especially in its final ten minutes – the film itself remains a little more clear-eyed. By placing us close to the pigs’ lives while resisting the temptation to narrativise, _Gunda_ allows viewers space to observe, ruminate, and formulate their own position in response to what they are seeing and experiencing.

In his essay, John Berger suggested that there is a dualism in our relationship with animals: ‘A peasant becomes fond of his pig and is glad to salt away its pork.’ The key word for Berger in this sentence is ‘and’, which he highlights is not ‘but,’ arguing that humans who are matter-of-fact and intimate with animals are capable of embodying both facets of this ancient relationship in concert, rather than contradiction. He then juxtaposes this with the horrified disconnection of urban observers; a reminder that our own reaction to Gunda’s conclusion will largely be symptomatic of our own experiences with nature.

And therein the power of Kossakovsky’s film, and his approach, arguably lies. Because the audience is wordlessly present with an experience that they must parse for themselves, the lessons and reflections are potentially deepened, more personal and impactful. Berger described the abyss of non-comprehension across which humans look at animals, and _Gunda_ attempts to bridge it, just a little.<br>
**Ben Nicholson, _Sight & Sound_, Summer 2021**<br>

_Gunda_ is a mesmerising perspective on sentience within animal species, normally – and perhaps purposely – hidden from our view. Displays of pride and reverence, amusement and bliss at a pig’s inquisitive young; her panic, despair and utter defeat in the face of cruel trickery, are validations of just how similarly all species react and cope with events in our respective lives. Victor Kossakovsky has crafted a visceral meditation on existence that transcends the normal barriers that separate species. It is a film of profound importance and artistry.<br>
**Joaquin Phoenix, Executive Producer**<br>

_Gunda_ is pure cinema. This is a film to take a bath in – it’s stripped to its essential elements, without any interference. It’s what we should all aspire to as filmmakers and audiences – pictures and sound put together to tell a powerful and profound story without rush. It’s jaw dropping images and sound put together with the best ensemble cast, and you have something more like a potion than a movie.<br>
**Paul Thomas Anderson**<br>
<br><br>
**GUNDA**<br>
_Directed by:_ Victor Kossakovsky<br>
_A_ Sant & Usant _production_<br>
_In co-production with:_ Louvertoure Films<br>
_In association with:_ Storyline Studios, Hailstone Films<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Joaquin Phoenix, Tone Grøttjord-Glenne<br>
_Co-executive Producer:_ Regina K. Scully<br>
_Produced by:_ Anita Rehoff Larsen<br>
_Co-producers:_ Joslyn Barnes, Susan Rockefeller<br>
_Written by:_ Victor Kossakovsky<br>
_Co-writer:_ Ainara Vera<br>
_Directors of Photography:_ Egil Haskjold Larsen, Victor Kossakovsky<br>
_Edited by:_ Victor Kossakovsky<br>
_Co-editor:_ Ainara Vera<br>
_Sound Designer/Sound Editor/Re-recording Mixer:_ Alexander Dudarev<br>

USA/Norway 2020<br>
93 mins<br>
<br><br>
**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Ammonite**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**Sound of Metal**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**Nomadland**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**First Cow**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**Surge**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**After Love**<br>
From Fri 4 Jun (Q&A with director Aleem Khan on Fri 4 Jun 17:30; Q&A with director Aleem Khan and actor Joanna Scanlan on Sun 13 Jun 18:40)<br>
**Gunda**<br>
From Fri 4 Jun<br>
**Fargo**<br>
From Fri 11 Jun<br>
**The Reason I Jump**<br>
From Fri 18 Jun<br>
**Nashville**<br>
From Fri 25 Jun<br>
**Ultraviolence**<br>
From Sat 26 Jun<br>
Sat 26 June 14:20 + Q&A with director Ken Fero and contributor Janet Alder<br>
**Supernova**<br>
From Fri 2 Jul<br>
**Another Round**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Jumbo**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Deerskin**<br>
From Fri 16 Jul<br>
**Girlfriends**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
**Mandabi**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
<br><br>
**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking atBFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
