---
layout: post
title: First Cow
published: true
date: 2021-05-28
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES']
tags: [Drama, Western]
metadata: 'USA, 2019, 122 mins<br> Director: Kelly Reichardt'
pdf: '2021-05-28-first-cow.pdf'
---
There have been many genteel scenes in westerns in the past but none so winningly genteel as the whole of _First Cow_. Kelly Reichardt and Jonathan Raymond’s screenplay is based on Raymond’s novel _The Half-Life_. It has the flavour of a much-embellished yarn, yet is told so gently and seemingly simply that you take it in like a deep breath on a summer’s night in the woods. We’re in the 1820s (except for a brief present-day prologue), in Reichardt’s beloved Oregon – the locale of her _Old Joy_, _Wendy and Lucy_, _Meek’s Cutoff_ and _Night Moves_. Cookie Figowitz (John Magaro) is collecting yellow mushrooms to feed the irascible fur trappers whose ‘cookie’ he is, when he comes across the naked figure of King Lu (Orion Lee), an ethnically Chinese man, hiding in the bushes. King Lu explains he’s on the run from some Russians who mean to kill him. Cookie hides him until he makes his own escape.

They meet again in the environs of a trading-post settlement after Cookie has been paid off, and King Lu invites him to his shack in the woods for a drink. In the most touching of many touching scenes, while King Lu goes to chop wood for the fire, Cookie sweeps out the hut and gathers a simple bunch of flowers and puts them in a jug. For this is a film about two great themes of the old west: homesteading and rustling.

What gets rustled here, however, is not cattle – the first cow ever to reach Oregon has only just made its way to the Chief Factor (Toby Jones) – but the cow’s milk. This is our odd couple’s great scheme: Cookie is an expert baker and yearns to make some cakes with real milk, so, with King Lu’s encouragement, he secretly milks the Chief Factor’s cow at night, while King Lu keeps watch. Soon Cookie’s delicious cakes, made with a honey drizzle, are making them a fortune. So, obviously, trouble is brewing on the horizon, of a kind you can easily imagine.

Shot to be projected in academy ratio, _First Cow_ has the down-at-heel period authenticity of, say, _McCabe & Mrs. Miller_ married to the poignancy of Sam Peckinpah’s westerns, and it’s couched in an always playful anti-macho mood of laconic going-with-the-flow while subverting the clichés of westerns. Its use of detail – the paraphernalia of pioneer existence – is exquisite. Its visual approach emphasises warm colours amidst organic mulch. It knows how to amuse with empathy, even throwing in a couple of really dumb children’s jokes of a kind I’m fond of, but which I won’t spoil by telling here. Nothing is made too great a fuss of except by belligerent and vengeful souls in a place where the law is really the Chief Factor, the Factor’s men and the odd military officer.

What’s really impressive is its use of a prelapsarian mood to portray an America built on racial and social diversity. Cookie and King Lu live together but the film and we never care to know on what basis; the English Factor seems to be married to a Native American, and when they’re visited by a military man, they want to impress him with their sophistication. That melting-pot idea of the States is presented as everyday reality and the dialogue is riddled with language in-jokes. These are particularly relished by Toby Jones as the Chief Factor, but the cast as a whole are at ease in having fun with a world rich in now-disused expressions and a huge variety of accents. John Magaro does quietly cute and dreamy like he was born to it; Orion Lee, playing someone who’s had to grow up too fast to be wise, gives the right note of mystery to his ethereal thinker. In a much smaller role, Ewan Bremner’s cocky highlander is a treat, but everyone in this film comes across like they always belonged there.<br>
**Nick James, _Sight & Sound_, June 2021**

**Kelly Reichardt on ‘First Cow’**

As Reichardt says, _First Cow_ is about ‘the very beginning of the story of commerce, before America is really even America’. Any film that deals on a grassroots level with that subject is following in the muddy footprints of Robert Altman’s _McCabe & Mrs. Miller_ (1971). ‘That’s a film I love,’ she says. ‘I knew when I was building the town that it was all very McCabe, almost a miniature version of that film, so I was, like, “Oh well, let’s just own that I’m influenced by this, and bring in René”.’

That’s René Auberjonois, the beaky character actor who played the innkeeper in Altman’s film. Reichardt cast him as a curmudgeon in _Certain Women_, then gave him a one-line cameo in _First Cow_ as ‘Man with Raven’ – an inadvertent homage to another Altman picture, _Brewster McCloud_ (1970), in which Auberjonois was an ornithologist who gradually turns into a bird. His presence in _First Cow_ feels talismanic and, in the wake of his death in 2019, inescapably poignant. ‘I wrote the part for him,’ she recalls. ‘I said, “OK, you’re gonna have a bird and live in a shack, and you’re feeling annoyed by the fourth house that’s being built in the town. It’s like gentrification is already bumming you out.” He really went a long way with the scraps he was given.’

Then again, every crumb in Reichardt’s world represents a banquet of detail. A depth of research and experience is packed tightly into each corner of the _mise en scène_, each actor’s movements and mannerisms. She favours chores over rehearsal; if her cast are performing the tasks and routines of their characters for real, then she has succeeded in manufacturing what _The New York Times_ described as ‘conditions in which actors cannot act’.

That immersive approach extended to _First Cow_. ‘The actors were building fires and learning how to set traps and all those things. They have to concentrate on what they’re doing, and then they don’t have to perform.’ The film’s amiable partners-in-crime are Cookie (John Magaro), a trappers’ cook, and the Chinese immigrant King Lu (Orion Lee), who whip up batches of misshapen doughnuts, which they then take to market. The treats sell like, well, hot cakes. Among the salivating customers queuing each day for them is the wealthy, melancholy Englishman (Toby Jones) whose imported cow is – unbeknown to him – the source of the recipe’s creaminess.

In the manner of those actors who brag about performing their own stunts, Magaro can boast of doing all his own milking and baking. ‘He really got into it,’ says Reichardt. ‘And Toby loved the cakes. It’s fried bread. What’s not to love?’

Friendship in the movie provides Cookie and King Lu with wealth beyond money, sweetness beyond doughnuts. Reichardt calls the central dynamic ‘the opposite of _Old Joy_, where the two friends realise they don’t have much in common any more. Here you get this friendship growing from the beginning.’ The two leads met for the first time shortly before shooting began. ‘They went off for a little survivalist weekend in the woods in their costumes, and got to know one another. Just by happenstance, Orion does have a lot of King Lu in him and Magaro has a lot of Cookie. Orion is a lover of big films. He’s actually in a _Star Wars_ movie! [_Star Wars: Episode VIII – The Last Jedi_, 2017]. So he was always, like, “Is this even coming across?” He had the film in mind, not just the scene. Whereas Magaro likes to work in his own head. His questions were more like: “This paper I’m rolling this cigarette with, is it the right kind of…?” It was so much fun looking through the camera and seeing this friendship unfolding in front of me.’

Reichardt and her regular co-writer Jon Raymond adapted the screenplay from the latter’s 2004 novel _The Half-Life_, pruning and reshaping it radically along the way. They had to: with its two-pronged narrative alternating between the 1820s and the 1980s, and spanning several continents, a strictly faithful screen version would have run to tens of millions of dollars at least. (That said, it wasn’t all cutbacks: there is no cow in the book.)

Reichardt has an amused, affable disposition, but she appreciates the pitfalls of discussing in any detail the elusive movies she makes. Ask her about the ways in which _First Cow_ intersects with our times, and she winces. ‘I don’t want to sum it up,’ she says. ‘But the big topic when we were making the film was immigration. It’s always interesting to me thinking about who has the power and who doesn’t. I think that’s there throughout all the films – the question of society, and who we are to each other, and what our obligations are. It’s that idea in the American outlook: “We’re all in it together” versus “each man for himself”. Those are constant themes for me. At some point after those early conversations, you want all that shit to go away so you can just look at your characters and go, “This is the story I’m telling”.’

She seems concerned that she has said too much. ‘You make a film where you’re trying carefully not to say something, and then you spend the next year or so saying it.’ But she needn’t worry: her movies have mystery enough. No amount of conversation will milk them dry.<br>
**Ryan Gilbey, _Sight & Sound_, June 2021**


**First Cow**<br>
_Directed by_: Kelly Reichardt<br>
©: A24 Distribution LLC<br>
_A_ Filmscience _production_<br>
_Presented by_: A24, IAC Films<br>
_Executive Producers_: Scott Rudin, Eli Bush, Louise Lovegrove, Christopher Carroll<br>
_Produced by_: Neil Kopp, Vincent Savino, Anish Savjani<br>
_Screenplay by_: Jon Raymond, Kelly Reichardt<br>
_Based upon the novel_ The Half-life _by_: Jon Raymond<br>
_Director of Photography_: Christopher Blauvelt<br>
_Editor_: Kelly Reichardt<br>
_Production Designer_: Anthony Gasparro<br>
_Costume Designer_: April Napier<br>
_Music_: William Tyler<br>
_Production Sound Mixer_: Christian Dolan<br>

**Cast:**<br>
John Magaro _(Cookie)_<br>
Orion Lee _(King-Lu)_<br>
Toby Jones _(Chief Factor)_<br>
Ewen Bremner _(Lloyd)_<br>
Scott Shepherd _(captain)_<br>
Gary Farmer _(Totillicum)_<br>
Lily Gladstone _(Chief Factor’s wife)_<br>
René Auberjonois _(man with raven)_<br>

USA 2019<br>
122 mins<br>

_A MUBI release_<br>



**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Ammonite**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**Sound of Metal**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**Nomadland**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**First Cow**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**Surge**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**After Love**<br>
From Fri 4 Jun<br>
**Fargo**<br>
From Fri 11 Jun<br>
**The Reason I Jump**<br>
From Fri 18 Jun<br>
**Nashville**<br>
From Fri 25 Jun<br>
**Ultraviolence**<br>
From Sat 26 Jun; Sat 26 June 14:20 + Q&A with director Ken Fero and contributor Janet Alder<br>

<br><br>
**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**<br>
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at **[bfi.org.uk/join](https://www.bfi.org.uk/become-bfi-member)**

**BFI SOUTHBANK**<br>
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.

We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.

**BFI PLAYER**<br>
We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult & classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals & Free to view. See something different today on **[player.bfi.org.uk](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)**

**Join the BFI mailing list** for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at **[www.bfi.org.uk/signup](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)**

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk).**
