---
layout: post
title: Censor
published: true
date: 2021-08-20
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Horror]
metadata: 'UK 2020, 84 mins<br> Director: Prano Bailey-Bond'
pdf: '2021-08-20-censor.pdf'
---

_Censor_ has its roots in the 2015 short _Nasty_, which Prano Bailey-Bond pitched to the BFI Short Film Fund as a pilot for her feature. The BFI funding never came through, but the short progressed nonetheless, becoming a test ground for Bailey-Bond’s ideas about the positive power of forbidden cinema. In _Nasty_, a young boy named Doug who is searching for his father finds a family connection through the portal of horror videos – specifically a ‘video nasty’-style movie punningly entitled _Evil_ _Dad_. Although the narrative trajectories of _Nasty_ and _Censor_ are very different, both involve a character longing for a lost loved one, being drawn into the world of the ‘nasties’ – literally.

‘I was exploring the blurred line between fiction and reality,’ says Bailey-Bond, who wanted to satirise and invert negative perceptions of horror. ‘The key point is that, for me, and indeed for all the horror fans I know, horror isn’t vile or evil. In fact it’s somewhere that you can find something quite healing and cathartic, and darkly beautiful. So in both films I wanted to subvert the traditional idea of what you can get _from_ horror. The popular perception is that these movies are harmful – that they can somehow do bad things to viewers, and therefore need to be cut or banned. But in both _Nasty_ and _Censor_, you could say that the horror world _rescues_ the central character. In the fiction of the horror world, they can have what they want, when they can’t in real life.’

In _Nasty_, Bailey-Bond playfully riffs on a line from Sam Raimi’s _The Evil Dead_, as the video calls out for Doug to ‘join us’ – an acknowledgement of the sense of kinship many horror fans experience. As for _Censor_, perhaps the film’s most poignant moment comes when the quasi-mythical fictional character the Beastman (Guillaume Delaunay), whom Enid has witnessed committing atrocities on screen, embraces the censor with what seems to be a healing hug. Inspired by the figure of Michael Berryman, who became a horror icon through his starring role in Wes Craven’s _The Hills Have Eyes_ (1977), the Beastman ‘became a metaphor for the whole “video nasties” phenomenon; something that is dressed up in monstrous form but is actually harmless. It’s funny, but as we were shooting that scene, I realised that it’s the only time in the film that Enid is held in an almost safe, protective way. It’s so beautiful, and so morally weird, because it features a character realising that they are being welcomed by the dark side, and that this place of fantastical horror is actually kinder than the “light side” – the reality in which no one is reaching out to her or comforting her. I think that’s why that moment exists; it was all about the idea that in horror you can find some sort of solace, and I think that’s true for a lot of horror fans.’

It was certainly true for me. In an essay entitled ‘I was a teenage horror fan’, which appeared in the 1997 anthology _Ill Effects: The Media/Violence Debate_, I fondly remembered the late-night horror screenings where I would find myself ‘surrounded by other “loners” who, like me, were clearly getting more out of these movies than passing scares, watching them again and again, learning them, studying them.’ While writing _Censor_, Bailey-Bond found herself drawn to _Ill Effects_, particularly to an introductory essay to the Second Edition written by editors Martin Barker and Julian Petley. ‘There’s a quote in that introduction where they say about horror movies: “What is condemned as ‘gratuitous’ and ‘immoral’ is actually experienced by its key fans as _political_.” That really tied into many of the themes of _Censor_; themes of free will; the function of interpretation; the power to create a personal narrative; and the way that we read films according to what we _want_ to see. They go on to say: “There is a strong tendency for press, politicians and pundits to ‘name’ something as ‘violence’, to judge it in simplistic moral terms, and thus warrant searches for simple ‘causes’ (such as ‘violent media’) of events which happen for a whole variety of complex social and political reasons.” Again, that was something I was thinking about in _Censor_, because it’s sort of central to the whole idea of the “video nasties” scare.’

To evoke that age of the ‘nasties’, Bailey-Bond and her team (which included executive-producer/advisor Kim Newman) conjured a series of fictional titles – such as ‘Asunder’ and ‘Don’t Go in the Church’ – that resembled movies on the aforementioned DPP list of impoundable titles. The key was evoking the aesthetic of films which had been feverishly viewed on VHS and Betamax in the 80s without descending into parody or mimicry – a complicated balancing act that involved a mixture of homage and update. To director of photography Annika Summerson, Bailey-Bond gave a collection of Lucio Fulci films, while cast and crew were asked to study everything from Tobe Hooper’s _The Texas_ _Chain Saw Massacre_ (1974), Romano Scavolini’s _Nightmares in a Damaged_ _Brain_ (aka _Nightmare_, 1981) and Joe D’Amato’s _Absurd_ (1981) to Hélène Cattet and Bruno Forzani’s _gialli_-inspired 2009 Belgian oddity _Amer_. For Niamh Algar, Bailey-Bond suggested John Hancock’s cult offering _Let’s Scare Jessica to Death_ (1971) and Michael Haneke’s sadomasochistic romance _The_ _Piano_ _Teacher_ (2001) as touchstones.

Most intriguingly, Bailey-Bond directed sound designer Tim Harrison to the 1978 animation _Watership_ _Down_, having been told by a former censor that the BBFC building was like a rabbit warren – an idea that tickled the director. (Like Disney’s _Bambi_, many young viewers still remember that animated Richard Adams adaptation with a mixture of heartbreak and horror). She was similarly struck by the ever-so-slightly seedy ambience of the BBFC’s Soho headquarters, full of rooms in which people were watching sex and violence, while the real treasures were buried in the basement. Former examiners like Carol Topolski offered memories of the process of film censorship, while former BBFC head of communications Catherine Anderson and long-serving compliance officer David Hyman were typically open, helpful and welcoming – a sea-change since the more patrician days of chief censor James Ferman, who ran the organisation from 1975-99. Yet Bailey-Bond is keen to point out that _Censor_ is first and foremost a work of fiction, one that very specifically avoids getting bogged down in the exact detail of the ‘nasties’ scare, in which the BBFC was initially bypassed – the very cause of the original panic.

‘We thought about that a lot in terms of when we set the film,’ she says. ‘The thing is that there is just so much annoying history. And we decided that we just had to get away from that: making the films that we talk about fictional; making it “the censor’s office” rather than the BBFC; not really specifying what city we are in; and keeping the exact time-period somewhat vague – it’s a loosely fictional 1985, although we went back and forth between that and ’82-’83 during the development. So we basically created a world in which we could be a bit slidey with facts and history. Because there is a lot of “lore” around the “video nasties”, and specific things that happened at different times. And if you try and stick rigidly to that it just constricts you creatively. And also it’s no fun. Because we’re not making a documentary – we’re making a character journey. And you have to remain focused on how to explore all these ideas, through this character, in an entertaining and meaningful way. You have to bend the facts.’

So, if the film is specifically _not_ a recreation of historical fact, what does the central theme of censorship _mean_ for Bailey-Bond? ‘It’s to do with the idea that we self-censor traumatic experiences,’ she replies. ‘Enid can’t exactly remember what happened the day her sister disappeared. And in a way, her job becomes a way of exploring that idea of censoring ourselves. We censor to _protect_ ourselves; and we also censor to protect others _from_ ourselves.’

As for the redemptive power of horror, Bailey-Bond is clear that (as Barker and Petley suggested) ‘there’s a great tendency to just categorise the genre as schlocky – to dismiss it, when actually it is trying to say something complex and intelligent. Horror _is_ part of the real world, so if film isn’t “granted permission” to reflect that, are we avoiding facing it as a reality? All the terrible things that have happened throughout history, that get rewritten or covered up – society can’t heal from it, and we can’t process it. On both personal and social levels we kind of need to face the “bad stuff” in life in order to get past it. That’s not a radical thought – it’s why anyone goes for counselling, and hopefully comes out  feeling better!’<br>
**Mark Kermode, _Sight & Sound_, June 2021**<br>

**CENSOR**<br>
_Director_: Prano Bailey-Bond  
_©_: Censor Productions Ltd, The British Film Institute, Channel Four Television Corporation, Ffilm Cymru Wales  
_Production Company_: Silver Salt Films  
_Produced in association with_: Kodak Motion Picture, Cinelab London  
_Presented by_: BFI, Film4, Ffilm Cymru Wales  
_Executive Producers_: Andy Starke, Ant Timpson, Kim Newman, Naomi Wright, Lauren Dark, Ollie Madden, Daniel Battsek, Mary Burke, Kimberley Warner  
_Produced by_: Helen Jones  
_Casting_: Nanw Rowlands  
_Written by_: Prano Bailey-Bond, Anthony Fletcher  
_Director of Photography_: Annika Summerson  
_Editor_: Mark Towns  
_Production Designers_: Paulina Rzeszowska, Paulina Rzeszowska  
_Costume Designer_: Saffron Cullane  
_Hair & Make-up Designer_: Ruth Pease  
_Original Music by_: Emilie Levienaise-Farrouch  
_Sound Designer_: Tim Harrison  

**Cast**<br> 
Niamh Algar _(Enid Baines)_  
Nicholas Burns _(Sanderson)_  
Vincent Franklin _(Fraser)_  
Sophia La Porta _(Alice Lee)_  
Adrian Schiller _(Frederick North)_  
Clare Holman _(June)_  
Andrew Havill _(George)_  
Felicity Montagu _(Valerie)_  
Danny Lee Wynter _(Perkins)_  
Clare Perkins _(Anne)_  
Guillaume Delaunay _(Beastman)_  
Richard Glover _(Gerald)_  
Michael Smiley _(Doug Smart)_<br>

UK 2020<br>
84 mins<br>

Courtesy of Vertigo Releasing<br>


**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Limbo**<br>
Continues from Fri 30 Jul<br>
**The Most Beautiful Boy in the World**<br>
From Sun 1 Aug<br>
**Now, Voyager**<br>
From Fri 6 Aug<br>
**The Sparks Brothers**<br>
From Fri 6 Aug<br>
**The Story of a Three Day Pass**<br>
From Sat 7 Aug<br>
**CODA**<br>
From Fri 13 Aug<br>
**Censor**<br>
From Fri 20 Aug<br>
**Souad**<br>
From Fri 27 Aug<br>
**Wildfire**<br>
From Fri 3 Sep<br>
**The Maltese Falcon**<br>
From Fri 17 Sep (preview + extended intro on Wed 8 Sep 17:50)<br>


**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
