---
layout: post
title: Swan Song
published: true
date: 2021-12-08
readtime: true
categories: ['EXCLUSIVE PREVIEW']
tags: [Sci-Fi, Drama]
metadata: 'USA 2021, 112 mins<br> Director: Benjamin Cleary'
pdf: '2021-12-08-swan-song.pdf'
---

_+ pre-recorded Q&A with director Benjamin Cleary, producer Rebecca Bourke and actors Mahershala Ali and Naomie Harris_

Writers, artists, and filmmakers have long considered the massive implications of being able to replace human life with a facsimile but while others have gone down dark alleys, Benjamin Cleary saw it from a more upbeat perspective, wondering how such a technology might allow a couple on the verge of tragedy to instead grow and transform. Would a man, given the incredible chance, choose to keep his loved ones happy and free from loss – even at the cost of concealing the most monumental of secrets?

The Dublin-based filmmaker is best known for his Academy Award-winning short _Stutterer_, about a lonely typographer connecting with his new girlfriend despite a severe speech impediment. Though not a stutterer himself, he based that lead character on a close friend. With _Swan Song_, he also drew on lived experiences. Early in his life, a series of deaths of young friends, as well as that of his best friend’s mother when they were still teenagers, devastated Cleary. He saw first-hand how intense grief could short-circuit youthful dreams.

‘At that young age, you really see the ripple effect that death has on everyone around the person. The people who are left behind suffer so much. Those wounds can take an awfully long time to heal, if they ever do,’ reflects Cleary.

These events led Cleary to ponder what might happen if you could give your closest loved ones the gift of obliterating loss. What if you could cheat death, at least partly, by navigating a covert way around it? Having seen friends boldly search for any possible extension of life, no matter the risks, he felt certain there would be those who would venture into the unknown.

‘Someone very close to my family was diagnosed with a brain tumour a number of years ago and hearing them say to their specialist that they would try anything, no matter how experimental, if it had even the slightest chance of working, really stuck with me. That was one of the things that sparked the ideas that led to _Swan Song_,’ Cleary explains.

Cleary wasn’t so much interested in the scientific elements of replication. Rather, he was fascinated by the vast moral, spiritual and psychological dilemmas such a technology would pose if put into action. As he began writing _Swan Song_, he had Cameron grapple with many of them – not in the abstract, but within the confines of a very real and relatable family life with the usual flaws and miscommunications, but also moments of deep wonder and joy.

As Cameron grows ever closer to giving his life over to a replica of himself, he is overcome with doubts. Is this a betrayal – or is it heroically selfless – to keep his death under wraps? Is he harming Poppy by not sharing his last moments with her? Or is he giving her, their son, and their child to come the chance to thrive in a strong, renewed marriage? What about the replicant that the laboratory temporarily names Jack? How can Cameron relate to Jack – who is Cameron genetically but also isn’t quite fully Cameron – and help him to be the husband he most wants to be? And what can Cameron learn by watching his double step into his  everyday life?

These questions kept spurring even bigger questions as Cleary wrote. Yet the more complex things got, the more Cleary homed in on the delicate tale of love at the core. He maintained a taut simplicity with the storytelling, a minimalism that not only laid bare the connection between Cameron and Poppy but also ultimately informed the film’s entire visual design.

Once the screenplay for _Swan Song_ started circulating, the mix of rich ideas and emotional weight quickly attracted attention. Producers Adam Shulman and Jacob Perlin of Anonymous Content both reacted in their own very personal ways to Cameron’s dilemma.

‘I vividly remember when Ben pitched us,’ recalls Shulman. ‘Because at the time a relative of mine had terminal cancer and my children were in the throes of growing up, so I completely latched onto the ideas in the story. We then had enormous fun working with Ben to hone this complex narrative. As the story involves Cameron downloading all of his memories, it was like a Rubik’s Cube of figuring out all the myriad possibilities of which memories to include, and when in the timeline they should appear. We had many engrossing discussions about Cameron’s struggle with whether to move ahead.’

‘What was so rare and attractive is that this is a love story that poses big moral questions,’ adds Perlin. ‘The backdrop is sci-fi, but inside that is the tale of a man who wants to leave a better version of himself behind for his wife. It’s so thought-provoking. I can’t wait for audiences to see and talk about this film.’

Shulman and Perlin were eventually joined by veteran producer Jonathan King, who recently started Concordia Studio, and Rebecca Bourke, who had produced all of Cleary’s short films in Ireland. King says, ‘After seeing Ben’s shorts, I knew he had the ability to deliver gut-punch emotions. He’s very skilled at capturing the interior of his characters – their fears, longings and desires – which is the heart of _Swan Song_.’

Bourke anticipates audiences talking about Cameron’s choices long after the credits roll. ‘I expect _Swan Song_ will ignite conversations about love, life, relationships and the tough decisions we are sometimes forced to make,’ she says. ‘It’s exciting to have a love story that also provokes complex existential questions like what is a soul, what is consciousness, what makes you who you are?’

Development of _Swan Song_ took a transformational turn when Cleary heard Mahershala Ali was interested in the project. Ali was so taken with the story he wanted a creative hand in the filmmaking to ensure the story of this family was told authentically. He came aboard not only in the lead role but as a hands-on producer, bringing along Mimi Valdés – his partner in the new production company Know Wonder – who is known for championing inclusivity across all forms of  pop culture.

‘As someone who has experienced the loss of so many loved ones, I was intrigued by the idea of preventing your family and friends from grieving,’ Valdés shares. ‘Also, I couldn’t believe the role was being offered to Mahershala! Black people are rarely seen in these kinds of movies, and this felt like an opportunity to tell a story about a Black family we rarely get to tell – one of simple humanity. Hollywood prefers to focus on racism, police brutality, trauma, etcetera when it comes to Black stories instead of us just living life, existing like regular human beings.  We’re also beyond proud that this unique story about a Black family will be Know Wonder’s first narrative feature. The opportunity to produce a film like this is not only gratifying, but it’s also validation that Black stories are global stories with universal themes.’

Ali and Valdés made a significant mark on the screenplay and design, committing themselves to ensuring that every aspect of the story was true to the Turners as a Black family. ‘We felt the weight of responsibility to get this right,’ notes Valdés. ‘Black people just don’t exist in this genre. So, it was crucial that everything about the family felt authentic, from the art on the walls to Poppy’s hair. We also wanted to make sure there was a sense of optimism, a sense that the near future will indeed continue to improve for our community.’

As for Cleary, he fed off the input. ‘Ben was completely open to all of our suggestions,’ recalls Valdés. ‘He’s a true collaborator and given that this is such a personal story for him, his willingness to make changes was especially admirable. Ben is an empathetic soul and seeing him tap into this superpower as a filmmaker is beautiful.’

That empathy, Valdés notes, is also what allows the film to transcend its futuristic setting by addressing why the future matters to us in the first place – because of those who inhabit it. ‘People will certainly talk about Cameron’s decision, whether they agree with it or not, and what they would do in his situation. But I also hope people find joy in watching the love within this family, and that it inspires audiences to cherish their loved ones while they’re still here,’ she says. ‘Tomorrow is not promised, and we need to enjoy each other while we can.’  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**SWAN SONG**  
_Directed by_: Benjamin Cleary  
©: Swan Song Productions LLC  
_a_ Know Wonder _and_ Anonymous Content _production_  
_a_ By Ghost _production_  
_in participation with_: Concordia Studio  
_Presented by_: Apple Original Films  
_Produced with the support of incentives for the  Irish Film Industry provided by the_:  Government of Ireland  
_With the participation of the_: Canadian Film or Video Production Tax Credit Program, Province of British Columbia Production Services Tax Credit  
_Tax incentive consulting services_:  Entertainment Partners Canada  
_Irish Production Services provided by_:  Assembly Studios  
_Executive Producer_: Shea Kammer  
_Produced by_: Mahershala Ali, Rebecca Bourke, Jonathan King, Jacob Perlin, Adam Shulman,  Mimi Valdés  
_Unit Production Manager_: Shea Kammer  
_Production Manager_: Drew Locke  
_Financial Controller_: Karen Bergen  
_Unit Manager_: Kate Vanderbyl Keates  
_Location Manager_: Terry McKay  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Lori Waters  
_1st Assistant Director_: Thomas Patrick Smith  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Chad Belair  
_Script Supervisor_: Jessica Clothier  
_Casting by_: Victoria Thomas  
_Written by_: Benjamin Cleary  
_Director of Photography_: Masanobu Takayanagi  
_2nd Unit Directors of Photography/Operators_:  Peter Wilke, Joel Ransom  
_A Camera Operator_: Masanobu Takayanagi  
_B Camera Operator_: Peter Wilke  
_Steadicam Operator_: Peter Wilke  
_Digital Imaging Technician_: Leon Rivers-Moore  
_Still Photographer_: Kimberley French  
_VFX Producing Supervisor_: Ajoy Mani  
_Visual Effects_: Image Engine, Screen Scene, Company 3, Territory, Basilic Fly, Pentagram  
_Special Effects Co-ordinator_: Tony Lazarowich  
_Edited by_: Nathan Nugent  
_Production Designer_: Annie Beauchamp  
_Supervising Art Director_: Michael Diner  
_Art Director_: Callum Webster  
_Set Decorator_: Shannon Gottlieb  
_Graphic Designer_: Patrick Zahorodniuk  
_Concept Artist_: Liam Beck  
_Illustrator_: Tony Drew  
_Storyboard Artist|Concept Designer_: Sam Hudecki  
_Property Buyers_: Clayton Flagg, Nancy Pownall  
_Costume Designer_: Cynthia Ann Summers  
_Make-up Department Head_: Debi Young  
_Make-up Department Head (Canada)_:  Zabrina Matiru  
_Hair Department Head_: Melissa Forney  
_Title Design by_: Andrew Lim  
_Colourist_: Tom Poole  
_Music by_: Jay Wadley  
_Orchestra_: Budapest Scoring  
_Music Supervisor_: Meghan Currier  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Chris Duesterdiek  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Bernard Gariepy Strobl  
_Supervising Sound Editors_: David McCallum,  Steve Fanagan  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Gaston Morrison  
_Unit Publicist_: Allison Barber  
_Digital Intermediate Provided by_: Company 3

**Cast**  
Mahershala Ali _(Cameron Turner/Jack)_  
Naomie Harris _(Poppy Turner)_  
Awkwafina _(Kate/Kate duplicate)_  
Adam Beach _(Dalton)_  
Nyasha Hatendi _(Andre)_  
Glenn Close _(Dr Jo Scott)_  
Lee Shorten _(Rafa)_  
Dax Rey _(Cory, age 8)_  
Aiden Adejuwon _(Cory, age 5)_  
Ace Lever _(Cory, age 2)_  
Cayden Shena _(Cameron, age 5)_  
Jayr Tinaco _(Alex)_  
Jessica Hayles _(Julie)_  
Mikayla Lagman _(Sammy)_  
Celia Aloma _(Cameron’s mum)_  
Luke Camilleri _(Rob)_  
Christi La Liberté _(elderly woman on train)_  
Lexi _(Ellington)_

USA 2021©  
112 mins

Courtesy of Apple Original Films
<br><br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Preview: Boiling Point + Q&A with director Philip Barantini and actors Ray Panthaki, Lauryn Ajufo and Alice Feetham**<br>
Wed 8 Dec 20:30<br>
**TV Preview: Ghosts Christmas Special + Q&A with actors Simon Farnaby, Martha Howe-Douglas, Jim Howick, Lolly Adefope and Kiell Smith-Bynoe**<br>
Thu 9 Dec 18:10<br>
**tick, tick… BOOM! + pre-recorded Q&A with director Lin-Manuel Miranda, producer Julie Yoh, executive producer Julie Larson, writer Steven Levenson and actors Andrew Garfield, Vanessa Hudgens, Alexandra Shipp, Robin de Jesus and Judith Light**<br>
Thu 9 Dec 20:30<br>
**Patti Boulaye**<br>
Sun 12 Dec 15:30<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera: Bridget Jones’s Diary at 20 + Q&A with director Sharon Maguire**<br>
Thu 16 Dec 18:00<br>
**Preview: Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy (Guzen to sozo)**<br>
Wed 29 Dec 18:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTEzODkwMzQyMl19
-->
