---
layout: post
title: Limbo
published: true
date: 2021-07-30
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Drama, Comedy]
metadata: 'UK, 2020, 104 mins<br> Director: Ben Sharrock'
pdf: '2021-07-30-limbo.pdf'
---

In a boxy 4:3 frame, like an old television show, a narrow road spills down toward the sea and the hills of a Scottish island rise up toward the sky. It’s a scene most familiar from aesthetically pleasing tourist photographs and advertisements urging you to ‘visit Scotland’. But beyond the frame, life is not so picturesque for the refugees caught in limbo between the homes they have been forced to leave behind and the lives that they hope to build in the UK.

Trapped in this temporal and spatial purgatory is Omar (Amir El-Masry), who has journeyed to Scotland from Syria with his instrument – his grandfather’s oud, always carried at his side as a material reminder of his connection to home – and the inescapable baggage of trauma, exile and homesickness. An acclaimed musician back in Damascus, he fears that he will not be able to play again.  Here, in this nowhere land, it just doesn’t feel right.

Accompanying Omar on his quest for asylum are Farhad (Vikash Bhai), an optimistic soul from Afghanistan, Ghanaian Abedi (Kwabena Ansah) and Nigerian Wasef (Ola Orebiyi), who all share a dilapidated house. Together, they hang out at the jetty, the park, a farm, the fishery.

Yet the vast, bleak splendour of the landscape does nothing to counter their discomfort in sub-zero temperatures with no coats, no proper income, and no regular contact with loved ones. Omar uses his mobile phone to play back old footage of his oud concerts, but it’s virtually useless as a means of communication (‘There was a better signal than this in the Mediterranean,’ reckons one of the men). Instead he relies on the island’s only phone box. The see-through glass shelter becomes a portal to his parents and his past, a gateway to memories of food and music. It almost – but not quite – shuts out the unceasing wind.

As Omar and the other men navigate the island, they also learn to navigate the contradictions of Scottish culture. Through the refugees’ interactions with the island’s locals, _Limbo_ captures something of the variance between political rhetoric that Scotland is a welcoming place, open to all, and the realities of a country that, like everywhere else, has problems with racism. Teenagers and adults alike casually throw racist stereotypes at Omar (is he Al-Qaeda, does he make bombs and rape women?) before offering him a ride into town (they don’t want him to get cold). The absurdity would be funny if his attempts to negotiate the strange environment weren’t so fraught with sadness and deprivation; this is a place where animal lives are worth more to white people than those of fellow humans.

Nevertheless, despite the austere conditions, the characters find humour and companionship. Their only furniture is a small, old-fashioned television from the donation centre, which provides a range of props and gadgets that become a recurring joke throughout the film. Discussions about racism between men of colour are delivered with wry humour. And Farhad offers a continuous stream of comic relief: from his obsession with Freddie Mercury to his love for a stolen chicken (Freddie Jr, whose incongruous clucking around the house is a source of great delight), he is an ever-cheerful foil to Omar’s more sombre presence.

Of course, even Farhad has his reasons for taking his chances in the hostile environment of the UK’s immigration system. His brief but exquisitely delivered testimony is as poignant and touching as more visceral and lengthy scenes involving Omar, and had me reaching for the tissues.

El-Masry’s performance as Omar is absorbing throughout; Bhai’s as Farhad achieves nuance and pathos with remarkably little dialogue. The pair carry the film with aplomb. Ola Orebiyi and Kwabena Ansah deserve praise too, capturing both the tired anger and playful resistance that are coping mechanisms for the stranded men. Abedi’s role-play in a ‘cultural awareness’ session is a masterclass in subtly undermining the white instructors.

Visually clever, and by turns witty and moving (director Ben Sharrock never sacrifices feelings for aesthetics), _Limbo_ ends as it begins – with uncertainty.  There are no answers to the men’s questions, no certainties in their quests  for survival.

But the film is a reminder, at a moment when empathy often feels in short supply, that the real boats crossing to the UK are carrying real people. People with families, hobbies, traditions, and songs. It’s a reminder, without ever being piteous, that when we watch television news or footage framed by social media feeds that we’re only seeing a partial story.

As Omar takes to the village-hall stage to share his music in the film’s closing scene, the aspect ratio changes, expanding to widescreen. Look beyond your limited worldview, _Limbo_ says, and see the bigger, more beautiful, and more complicated picture.  
**Rebecca Harrison, _Sight & Sound_, Summer 2021**

For Scottish writer-director Ben Sharrock, the idea of telling a story that reflects the complexity of individual refugee life had been a long-held passion. Sharrock picked up the prestigious Michael Powell Award for Best British Feature Film 2016 for his feature debut _Pikadero_ – the tale of a young couple searching for love in troubled economic times, shot entirely in the Basque language – and his sophomore feature takes a similarly humane look at ordinary lives caught in international turmoil.

‘I studied Arabic and Politics at Edinburgh University as an undergrad and spent a year living in Syria – this was 2009, just before everything kicked off ’says Ben. ‘Then, when I was in film school in 2013 I shot a short film at the refugee camps in southern Algeria. I spent time living in the camps, working with an NGO, and became fascinated with the impact of being a refugee has on one’s own identity. We would go into the camp schools and ask the displaced children to draw how they saw themselves – what they came up with was nothing to do with the fact that they were refugees.

‘It was difficult to approach such a complex and multi-faceted subject matter because you always feel in danger of not being able to do justice to the subject.  In truth, it’s impossible to say everything that needs to be said and explore everything to do with the “Refugee Crisis”. And as such, for me, it wasn’t about making a film about the “Refugee Crisis” as it was about making a film about a young man’s identity and him grieving for the loss of identity. This is something that is universally relatable because throughout life, we can all lose parts of us that form our sense of identity, no matter what your background is.’

When it came to writing the script for _Limbo_, Ben was clear. ‘I wanted to tell a story that has the landscape of the refugee as a subject matter, but with my style of filmmaking. So there are absurdist elements which rally against the representation of refugees in mainstream media, films that focus on the purely sensationalist aspects of that subject matter. I was thinking about the friends that I have in Syria, about how much I have in common with them. When I lived there, I ended up playing in the Damascus rugby team. We toured to the Lebanon and after matches we’d go out for a drink and chat. But here, we often have the left-wing media pushing us towards pitying refugees and the right-wing media scaremongering and demonising refugees. I wanted to tell a story where becoming a refugee wasn’t a conscious choice that a person has made – that it was only one facet of that person’s life. Yet at the same time, show how the label of “refugee” can be deeply destructive to one’s sense of identity.’

The decision for _Limbo_ to focus exclusively on the male refugee experience was a very deliberate one for Ben. ‘It’s the single male refugee that’s being demonised the most, seen as the big threat to society in the right-wing media. At university my dissertation was on Muslim representation in US cinema and TV. That idea of the threat of the single male refugee, someone who is seen as personifying “the other”, is very prevalent in our society and unfortunately there seems to be a resurgence of racial hatred, a re-emergence with people like Trump and the more sensationalised elements of Brexit.’  
**Production notes**
<br><br>


**LIMBO**  
_Directed by_: Ben Sharrock  
©: Limbo Production Ltd, Channel Four Television Corporation, The British Film Institute  
_Production Companies_: Caravan Cinema,  Creative Scotland  
_With the support of_: the British Film Institute, Film4  
_Developed with the support of_:  Scottish Film Talent Network through Creative Scotland via BFI NET.WORK  
_Made with the support of the_: BFI’s Film Fund  
_International Sales_: Protagonist Pictures  
_Executive Producers_: Julia Oh, Daniel Battsek, Robbi Allen, Ross McKenzie, Lizzie Francke  
_Produced by_: Irune Gurtubai, Angus Lamont  
_Line Producer_: Wendy Griffin  
_For BFI: Development Executive_: David Segal Hamilton; _Production & Development Executives_: Camilla Wren, Farhana Bhula; _Production Manager_: Iris Cohen; _Production Finance_: Katie Ellen; _Director of Legal and Business Affairs_: Clare Coulter  
_For Film4: Deputy Director_: Sue Bruce-Smith;  _Head of Creative_: Ollie Madden; _Development & Production Executive_: Ben Coren; _Head of Production_: Tori Parry; _Production Executive_:  Emily Leach; _Senior Legal & Business Affairs Executive_: Donnchadh McNicholl  
_For Creative Scotland: Executive Director_: Isabel Davis; _Executive Producer_: Sean Greenhorn  
_Production Coordinators_: Iain Canning,  Shona Mackenzie  
_Production Accountants_: Paul Zieleniec, Neil Cairns  
_Location Manager_: Richard Brough  
_Location and Recce Support_:  Screen Scotland Screen Commission  
_Locations Assistant/Fixer_: Adam Keltie  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Clare Maclean  
_1st Assistant Director_: Wendy Ashman  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Sean Boyle  
_Crowd 2nd Assistant Director_: Marilyn Edmond  
_3rd Assistant Director_: Fraser Malcolm  
_Script Supervisor_: Georgina Higgins  
_Casting Director_: Dan Jackson  
_Associate Casting Director_: Ross Barratt  
_Script Editor_: Anna Seifert Speck  
_Written by_: Ben Sharrock  
_Director of Photography_: Nick Cooke  
_Steadicam_: Martin Parry  
_2nd Assistant Camera_: David van der Zanden  
_Focus Puller_: Dave Hutchison  
_Gaffer_: Steve Arthur  
_Best Boy_: Sean McDonald  
_Key Grip_: Mark Dorris  
_Stills Photographers_: Saskia Coulson,  Colin Tennant  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: Nicholas Bennett  
_Visual Effects Executive Producer_: Kate Warburton  
_Visual Effects Producer_: Karl Kuehn  
_Visual Effects Co-ordinator_: Danielle Dunster  
_Editors_: Karel Dolak, Lucia Zucchetti  
_1st Assistant Editors_: Eve Doherty, Victoria Bate, Alastair Mackintosh  
_Production Designer_: Andy Drummond  
_Standby Art Director_: Caroline Grebbell  
_Assistant Art Director_: Elias Sommer  
_Graphic Designer_: Kenny McGuire  
_Scenic Artist_: Caroline Doney  
_Production Buyer_: Christine Orr  
_Property Master_: Tony Sheridan  
_Costume Designer_: Holly Rebecca  
_Assistant Costume Designer/Costume Standby_: Kirsty Halliday  
_Costume Supervisor_: Stuart Truesdale  
_Make-up Designer_: Kat Morgan  
_Make-up Artist_: Madeleine Drewell  
_Main Titles and Credits by_: Crystalness  
_End Titles Created with_: Endcrawl  
_Original Score by_: Hutch Demouilpied  
_Double Bass_: John Edwards  
_Saw and Violin_: Quinta  
_Cello_: Hannah Marshall  
_Violin and Viola_: Ali Alana  
_Flute and Recorders_: Juliet Grace  
_Brass Ensemble_: Harvey’s Brass  
_Soprano Saxophone_: Christopher White  
_Tenor Saxophone and Clarinet_: Sue Lynch  
_Alto and Soprano Saxophones_: Adrian Northover  
_Piano_: Vladimir Miller  
_Oud_: Frank Moon  
_Music Supervisor_: Phil Canning  
_Oud Consultant/Experts_: Attab Haddad,  Khyam Allami  
_Sound Designer_: Ben Baird  
_Sound Recordist_: Phil Croal  
_Boom Operator_: Fabio Santucci  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Ben Baird  
_Sound Editor_: Jack Wensley  
_Dialogue Editor_: Alexei Mungersdorff  
_[Sound] Effects Editor_: Jamie McPhee  
_ADR Mixer_: Nick Kray  
_Supervising Foley Artist_: Digba Kurpjel  
_Foley Artist_: Biko Gogaladze  
_Foley Recordist_: George Lekishvili  
_Foley Editor_: Srdjan Kurpjel  
_Stunt Supervisor/Fight Arranger_: Curtis Rivers  
_Syrian Arabic Consultant_: Marwa Mouazen  
_Dialect Coaches_: Neil Swain, Marina Tyndall,  Ros Steen, Marwa Mouazen  
_Animal Handler_: Joyce Miller  
_Unit Publicists_: Zoe Flower, Ruth Marsh  
_Special Thanks_: David Schwimmer, Polly Stokes

**Cast**  
Amir El-Masry _(Omar)_  
Vikash Bhai _(Farhad)_  
Ola Orebiyi _(Wasef)_  
Kwabena Ansah _(Abedi)_  
Kenneth Collard _(Boris)_  
Kais Nashif _(Nabil)_  
Sidse Babett Knudsen _(Helga)_  
Sodienye Ojewuyi _(Hamad)_  
Adam Abdalrhman _(crying man in phonebox)_  
Darina Al Joundi _(voice of Omar’s mum)_  
Nayef Rashed _(voice of Omar’s dad)_  
Cameron Fulton _(Plug)_  
Lewis Gribben _(Stevie)_  
Silvie Furneaux _(Cheryl)_  
Iona Elizabeth Thomson _(Tia)_  
Barbara Hunter _(scooter woman)_  
Shereen Sadiq _(Omar’s mum in video)_  
Hayan Rich _(Omar’s dad in video)_  
Rob Keltie _(postman)_  
Raadi Mahdi _(Abdul)_  
Elizabeth Ellis, Caroline Carlin, Gavin Carlin _(radio participants)_  
Grace Chilton _(Margaret)_  
Raymond Mearns _(Mike)_  
Ellie Haddington _(Beatrice)_  
Max Hendrick, Robin Spratt, Karen Campbell, Maureen Du Pree _(police)_  
Sanjeev Kohli _(Vikram)_  
Eric _(Freddie Jr)_  
Bobby Paton _(voice of policeman)_  
Tess Allen _(voice recording)_  
Gilly Gilchrist _(Jim)_  
Bess _(dog)_

UK 2020©  
104 mins

A MUBI release
<br><br>


**NEW RELEASES &  RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Limbo**<br>
From Fri 30 Jul<br>
**The Most Beautiful Boy in the World**<br>
From Fri 30 Jul<br>
**Now, Voyager**<br>
From Fri 6 Aug<br>
**The Story of a Three Day Pass**<br>
From Sat 7 Aug<br>
**CODA**<br>
From Fri 13 Aug<br>
**Censor**<br>
From Fri 20 Aug<br>
**Souad**<br>
From Fri 27 Aug
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTIzOTU4Njg0Nl19
-->
