---
layout: post
title: Asunder
published: true
date: 2021-09-04
readtime: true
categories: ['THE FILMS OF SAINT ETIENNE']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'UK 2016, 72 mins<br> Director: Esther Johnson'
pdf: '2021-09-04-asunder.pdf'
---

_Introduced by Esther Johnson and Bob Stanley_

Esther Johnson’s _Asunder_ is a unique and very special film. Instead of concentrating on military operations, the artist has researched and selected footage from the First World War to show how the lives of ordinary people of the North East were irrevocably affected by the conflict. Among many of the delightful surprises in the film is the way that women performed in traditionally male domains, even playing football to huge crowds. The footage is expertly threaded together and is complemented by Bob Stanley’s evocative and poetic words that are beautifully voiced by Kate Adie. The world of the past is brought into the present though an original score by Field Music and Warm Digits consummately performed with the Royal Northern Sinfonia, and culminates with a kind of joyous pathos in a traditional folk song performed by  The Cornshed Sisters. _Asunder_ is a warm film about hard times that pays tribute to the people of Tyne and Wear who were so vital to the war effort, and also to a community spirit that overcame great adversity. It is a tribute to the human spirit.  
**Helen de Witt, BFI London Film Festival**

_Asunder_  tells the story of what happened to an English town during the  First World War, with almost all of its men abroad fighting and its women and children left behind. The North East was in the front line, thanks to its shipyards and munitions factories.

Using archive and contemporary footage and audio, _Asunder_ collages the stories of people from Tyneside and Wearside to uncover what life was like on the home front, with bombs falling on Britain for the first time, conscientious objectors sentenced to death, and women working as doctors, tram conductors and footballers. The narrative moves from an Edwardian golden era, in which sport grew in popularity and aircraft and cars pointed to a bright new future, to a war that horrifically reversed this progress. In the  Battle of the Somme, commencing on 1 July 1916, British, French and German armies fought one of the most traumatic battles in military history. Over the course of just four months, more than one million soldiers were captured, wounded or killed in a confrontation of unimaginable horror.

The narration for the film is voiced by journalist Kate Adie, with the actor Alun Armstrong as the voice of the _Sunderland Daily Echo and Shipping Gazette_.

A film by Esther Johnson, with a soundtrack composed by Sunderland’s Mercury-nominated Field Music and Newcastle’s Warm Digits, performed with the Royal Northern Sinfonia and The Cornshed Sisters.

To commemorate the Battle of the Somme centenary, the premiere of _Asunder_ took place on 10 July 2016 at the Sunderland Empire, one of the largest remaining music halls in the UK, opened in 1 July 1907 by Vesta Tilley, known as Britain's best recruiting sergeant in  WW1. The premiere had a live soundtrack performed by Field Music, Warm Digits, Royal Northern Sinfonia and The Cornshed Sisters.  
**asunder1916.uk**
<br><br>

**ASUNDER**  
_Director:_ Esther Johnson  
_Producers:_ Esther Johnson, Bob Stanley  
_Text:_ Bob Stanley  
_Cinematography:_ Mary Farbrother  
_Additional Camera:_ Esther Johnson  
_Editor:_ Graham Taylor  
_Music:_ Field Music, Warm Digits  
_Performed with:_ Royal Northern Sinfonia,  The Cornshed Sisters  
_Sound Design:_ Chu-Li Shewring  
_Narrators:_ Kate Adie, Alun Armstrong  

UK 2016  
72 mins
<br><br>

**THE FILMS OF SAINT ETIENNE**<br>
**This Is Tomorrow + intro by Bob Stanley and Paul Kelly**<br>
Fri 3 Sep 14:30<br>
**Asunder + intro by Esther Johnson  and Bob Stanley**<br>
Sat 4 Sep 12:00<br>
**Finisterre + Q&A with Bob Stanley and  Pete Wiggs**<br>
Sat 4 Sep 15:00<br>
**How We Used to Live + Q&A with Pete Wiggs and Travis Elborough**<br>
Sat 4 Sep 17:20<br>
**Saint Etienne: Shorts Programme  + intro by Paul Kelly and Pete Wiggs**<br>
Sun 5 Sep 13:00<br>
**Lawrence of Belgravia + Q&A with Paul Kelly and Lawrence**<br>
Sun 5 Sep 15:30<br>
**What Have You Done Today Mervyn Day?  + Q&A with Pete Wiggs and Paul Kelly**<br>
Sun 5 Sep 18:30<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTA4MTYzMTgyXX0=
-->
