---
layout: post
title: I Am Cuba
published: true
date: 2021-10-20
readtime: true
categories: ['MIKE LEIGH’S CHOICES']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USSR/Cuba 1964, 134 mins<br> Director: Mikhail Kalatozov'
pdf: '2021-10-20-i-am-cuba.pdf'
---

Mikhail Kalatozov’s epic about the Cuban Revolution is breathtaking both for its scope and the audacity of its cinematic experiments, including the legendary floating tracking shot at the cigar factory. Four separate stories, bound together by a female narrator, the voice of Cuba. A feast for an audience, and a bumper harvest of inspiration for a filmmaker.<br>
**Mike Leigh**

Made in 1964, _I Am Cuba_ has been described as Communist kitsch. But from the first shot it is characterised not so much by ideology as by the ‘formalism’ of which Soviet director Mikhail Kalatozov (_Cranes Are Flying_, 1957) had been accused in his own country since the 30s. The camera drifts slowly over palm trees mysteriously drained of life by the high-contrast black-and-white photography. A voiceover repeats Russian poet Yevtushenko’s portentously poetic script in both Spanish and Russian, while the soundtrack blends Cuban percussion and male voices more suited to the ‘Volga Boat Song’. Floating on a canoe in the next shot, we are treated to a repertoire of Kalatozov’s techniques which will be obsessively repeated in the next two hours: distorting fish-eye lenses, extreme low and high angles, and a restlessly mobile camera, constantly plunging down into the vegetation or up over the streets and palms.

You can see what worried the Soviet authorities who funded this co-production and sent the crew and equipment to Cuba. Kalatozov clearly aestheticises poverty. The peasant farms of the second and fourth episodes are gardens of Eden, the sugar cane (shot from below once more) a great shining forest stalked by giant peasants. Here the exotic paradise of Cuba gets to play Virgin Nature to the Marxism that promises industrialisation amongst its other benefits. Moreover the camera is clearly consumed by the urban decadence it so stylishly documents. Much of the first episode seems to have drifted in from the David Bailey photo exhibition that was showing at the Barbican during _I Am_ _Cuba_’s run. Bikinied beauties jive atop skyscrapers and the camera even follows them into their rooftop pool to get a closer view. The impossibly glamorous prostitutes, wasp-waisted and beehived, embody a Caribbean cool the revolutionaries, however romantically unkempt, can hardly rival. When Afro-Cuban Betty cuts loose on the dancefloor, the camera gyrates with her, lost in ecstatic but problematic abandon.

It is perhaps not surprising that, according to critic-historian Michael Chanan, such co-productions were not much loved by audiences on the island at the time. But one unexpected pleasure for European viewers today is the glamour of Kalatozov’s _mise en scène_. The film’s Havana is not the now-ruinous dereliction of the old city, but a sleek vision of modernity worthy of _Wallpaper_ magazine. The students drive fast cars along wide highways or scale angular high rises, all concrete, glass and steel. The beachfront Malecón is eerily pristine. Shot just a few years after the Revolution, the film inadvertently reminds us that, in spite of appalling inequality and corruption, Cuba had been more developed than its island neighbours. So the predictable heavy handedness of Kalatozov’s propaganda (including the theft of a crucifix by a stereotypically Jewish tourist) is undercut by the uncontrollable aesthetic delight of its visual style. Sugar, intones the voiceover, is sweet; but it is harvested with bitter tears. Entranced with the tropics, Kalatozov swoons over the sweetness and can bring himself only to trudge dutifully through the tears.

This means that in the second, more-didactic half the film falls flat. Political pedagogy, however flashily shot, remains uncinematic; and the anonymous characters (students and peasants but curiously not workers) are too crudely schematic to embody historical process with the dynamic ‘typicality’ recommended by theorists such as Georg Lukács. But even here inexplicable moments of unmotivated lyricism irrupt: the initially jolly US sailors (‘Here come the Navy, hurrah!’) seem to be have been drafted in by Busby Berkeley while a snowstorm of revolutionary leaflets spiral down against a darkened sky, a strangely haunting image. If the Revolution’s promise of work and freedom now rings unbearably hollow and if the theme of prostitution is uncomfortably relevant today, then _I Am Cuba_ remains, Communist kitsch or not, a memorably eccentric and lyrical hymn to the transformatory powers of cinema.<br>
**Paul Julian Smith, _Sight and Sound_, August 1999**<br>

**I AM CUBA (SOY CUBA)**<br>
_Director_: Mikhail Kalatozov  
_Production Company_: Mosfilm, Instituto Cubano de Arte e Industria Cinematográficos  
_Production Managers_: Simyon Maryachim, Miguel Mendoza  
_Production Assistants_: M. Volovich, O. Zernov,
L. Garcia, R. Brutes, S. Miguel  
_Production Crew_: L. Obregon, L. Carrillo, J. Cruz, J. Varona, K. García, E. Musteler, M. Trabas, M. Noah, F. Labrador, A. Fonseca, R. Farinas  
_2nd Unit Directors_: J. Rouko, K. Ctenkin, T. Vargina  
_Assistant Director_: Bella Friedman  
_Continuity_: B. Trabkin, A. Vinokurov  
_Screenplay_: Yevgeni Yevtushenko, Enrique Pineda Barnet  
_Photography_: Sergei Urussevsky  
_Lighting Crew_: V. Mikhailob, G. Cantero  
_Camera Operators_: Alexander Calzatti, Boris Brozhovsky  
_Assistant Cameramen_: M. Orpesa, K. Shipov, M.A. Ramirez  
_Stills_: R. Dovo  
_Pyrotechnics_: V. Pugachev, E. Fong, B. Sukharetzky  
_Editor_: N. Glagoleva  
_Montage Assistant_: Lida Turina  
_Production Designer_: Yevgeny Svidetelev  
_Artistic Consultant/Costumes_: Rene Portocarrero  
_Make-up_: V. Rudinoy, L. Caceres  
_Music_: Carlos Fariñas  
_Orchestra Directors_: Emin Khachaturian, M. Duchesne  
_Choreography_: A. Suez  
_Sound_: V. Sharun  
_Sound Assistant_: Rodolfo Plaza  
_Senior Translator_: Pavel Grushko

**Cast**<br>
Sergio Corrieri _(Alberto)_  
Salvador Wood  
José Gallardo _(Pedro)_  
Raúl García _(Enrique)_  
Luz Maria Collazo _(Maria/Betty)_  
Jean Bouise _(Jim)_  
Alberto Morgan  
Celia Rodriguez _(Gloría)_  
Fausto Mirabal  
Robert García York _(American activist)_  
María de las Mercedes Diéz  
Bárbara Dominguez  
Jésus del Monte  
Luisa María Jiménez _(Teresa)_  
Mario González _(Pablo)_  
Tony López  
Héctor Castaneda  
Rosandro Lamadris  
Roberto Vilar  
Roberto Cabrera  
Alfredo Alvila  
José Espinosa  
Isabel Moreno  
Manuel Mora  
Raquel Revuelta _(the voice of Cuba)_  
N. Nikitina, Georgi Yepifantsev _(Russian text readers)_<br>

USSR/Cuba 1964©<br>
134 mins<br>

**MIKE LEIGH’S CHOICES**<br>
**Tokyo Story (Tôkyô monogatari)**<br>
Mon 18 Oct 20:20; Thu 21 Oct 14:30;  Sat 13 Nov 14:10; Tue 30 Nov 14:00<br>
**Jules et Jim**<br>
Tue 19 Oct 20:50; Wed 10 Nov 14:30<br>
**The Tree of Wooden Clogs  (L’albero degli zoccoli)**<br>
Wed 20 Oct 14:00; Fri 29 Oct 13:30;  Sun 7 Nov 13:50<br>
**I Am Cuba (Soy Cuba)**<br>
Wed 20 Oct 14:30; Sat 13 Nov 20:10<br>
**Radio Days**<br>
Sat 23 Oct 13:20; Tue 16 Nov 18:10<br>
**H3**<br>
Mon 25 Oct 18:00 (+ Q&A with director Les Blair); Wed 24 Nov 20:50<br>
**A Blonde in Love (AKA Loves of a Blonde)  
(Lásky jedné plavovlásky)**<br>
Mon 25 Oct 20:40; Fri 19 Nov 21:00<br>
**The Story of Gilbert and Sullivan**<br>
Sun 14 Nov 14:40; Sun 28 Nov 14:50<br>


**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
