---
layout: post
title: Binti
published: true
date: 2021-07-04
readtime: true
categories: ['T A P E  PRESENTS<br> BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM &#63']
tags: [Drama, Children]
metadata: 'Belgium 2019, 90 mins<br> Director: Frederike Migom'
pdf: '2021-07-04-binti.pdf'
---

Binti, a 12-year-old girl, was born in Congo but has lived with her father Jovial in Belgium since she was a baby. Despite not having any legal documents, Binti wants to live a normal life, and dreams of becoming a famous vlogger like her idol Tatyana. Elias, who is 11, runs his ‘save-the-okapi-club’ without the help of his father, who’s moved to Brazil following his divorce with Elias’ mother Christine.

When their annoying neighbour invites Christine on a romantic trip to Paris, Elias, upset and angry, runs away to his treehouse. At the same time, police raid Binti and Jovial’s home, sending the two on the run, and Binti into the path of Elias in his treehouse.

When their parents meet shortly after, Binti quickly sees the perfect solution to all her problems. If she can match her dad to Elias’ mom, they can get married and stay in Belgium. Binti joins Elias’ okapi club, and while they organise a big fundraiser together, she secretly starts her plan to make Christine fall in love with Jovial. Until Elias finds out what Binti is really up to…<br>

**Director’s Statement**<br>
I’m fascinated by courageous characters, in this case children who are fighting for what they know they deserve, who have a voice worth listening to, if only someone would pass them the mic.

I was young when I thought I knew what I wanted to do in life, and I lived in an environment that allowed me to do exactly that. Every single day, I’m grateful for this. Because imagine: you are a teenager, dreaming of a future with all your friends. But whilst they have the freedom to develop their talents, you don’t even have the freedom to show your ID, because you don’t have one.

Twelve-year-old Binti dreams of being famous (which 12-year-old doesn’t?  I know I did) but, on paper, she doesn’t exist. Online though, she has more than a thousand followers. Something’s just not right about that. Binti meets Elias, a lonely Belgian animal lover who wants to save the okapi and is still dealing with his parents’ divorce. She wants to match her dad to Elias’ mom because she believes that in doing so, she will be able to stay in Belgium. Elias dreams of organising a benefit to save the okapis, but he can’t do so on his own. Although at first, they have separate agendas, both children will eventually understand that together they stand stronger, that they need each other, and that together is better than alone.

_Binti_ is a film in which two children learn that they need each other to accomplish their dreams. Despite the seriousness of the subject, _Binti_ is an entertaining and approachable film, full of colour, humour, friendship and love. It believes in a successful multi-cultural society and in following your dreams. The social drama gets a positive twist in combining it with the energy and humour of a romantic comedy.<br>
**Production notes**<br>

**Yasmina**
Heading home from football, Yasmina sees her father being arrested.<br>
<br>

**YASMINA**<br>
_Directors:_ Ali Esmili, Claire Cahen

France 2018<br>
22 mins<br>

**BINTI**<br>
_Writer and Director:_ Frederike Migom<br>
_Producer:_ Katleen Goossens<br>
_Co-Producers:_ Annabella Nezri, Floor Onrust<br>
_Line Producer:_ Wim Ah Goossens<br>
_Production Manager:_ Dorien Onsea<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ Johan Ivens<br>
_Location_ _Manager:_ Jana Mannaerts<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Joachim Philippe<br>
_Gaffer:_ Mattijs Nackaerts<br>
Editor: Clemence Samson<br>
_Production_ _Designer:_ Talina Casier<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Sofie Callaerts<br>
_Hair & Make-Up Designer:_ Ingeborg Van Eetvelde _Composer:_ Le Motel<br>
_Sound_ _Engineer:_ Coen Gravendaal<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Jan Schermer<br>

**Cast**<br>
Bebel Tshiani Baloji _(Binti)_<br>
Mo Bakker _(Elias)_<br>
Joke Devynck _(Christine)_<br>
Baloji _(Jovial)_<br>
Frank Dierens _(Floris)_<br>
Alix Konadu _(Maaika)_<br>
Veronica Van Belle _(Zoë)_<br>
Aboubakr Bensaihi _(Farid)_<br>
Kuno Bakker _(Elias’ father)_<br>
Tatyana Beloy _(Tatyana)_<br>

Belgium 2019<br>
90 mins<br>
<br><br>
**T A P E PRESENTS: BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM?**<br>
**Burning an Illusion**<br>
Sat 3 Jul 14:20; Thu 8 Jul 17:45<br>
**While We Live (****Medan vi lever)**<br>
Sat 3 Jul 17:30; Tue 20 Jul 20:30<br>
**Binti**<br>
Sun 4 Jul 18:20; Mon 19 Jul 20:40<br>
**Eyimofe (This Is My Desire)**<br>
Fri 9 Jul 17:40<br>
**Pinky**<br>
Sat 10 Jul 20:50; Sat 24 Jul 11:40<br>
**Head-On (Gegen die Wand)**<br>
Sun 11 Jul 18:30; Tue 27 Jul 20:40<br>
**Black Girl (La noire de...)**<br>
Mon 12 Jul 18:20<br>
**The Namesake**<br>
Wed 14 Jul 17:40 (+ live spoken-word performance); Wed 21 Jul 20:40<br>
**What Will People Say (Hva vil folk si)**<br>
Fri 16 Jul 20:30; Sat 31 Jul 17:30<br>
**In Conversation with Nikesh Shukla**<br>
Fri 23 Jul 18:20<br>
**Lilting**<br>
Sat 24 Jul 17:20; Fri 30 Jul 20:40<br>
**Shoot the Messenger + Q&A with director Ngozi Onwurah, hosted by T A P E’s Angela Moneke**<br>
Thu 29 Jul 17:45<br>
**Culture Shock: Short Film Programme + Q&A with UNDR LNDN**<br>
Fri 30 Jul 17:40<br>

T A P E was founded in 2015 as a response to the lack of representation on screen.  
Find out more about this curatorial collective at **tapecollective.co.uk**
<br><br>
**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking atBFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
