---
layout: post
title: Jumbo
published: false
date: 2021-07-09
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Drama, Romance]
metadata: 'France/Belgium/Luxembourg, 2020, 93 mins<br> Director: Zoé Wittock'
pdf: '2021-07-09-jumbo.pdf'
---

Zoé Wittock’s debut feature is a disarmingly enchanting psychosexual tale of a young woman who falls in love with a fairground ride. Jeanne Tantois (Noémie Merlant, _Portrait of a Lady on Fire_) lives with her mother in Luxembourg, just across the border from France, and works at an amusement park by night where she cleans the giant, illuminated machines. A shy loner who’s been let down by all the men in her life, Jeanne develops a physical and emotional attachment to a ride that she names ‘Jumbo’, and finds fulfilment and a perception of love that’s been missing in her human relationships. Wittock’s take on objectophile love proved a success at the Sundance and Berlin Film Festivals, and marks the director as a talent to watch.  
**Justin Johnson, Lead Programmer**

After a title sequence written in flickering blue, green and red letters, writer-director Zoé Wittock’s _Jumbo_ begins with a strange vision: a young woman stands, her back to the camera, and opens her arms in ecstatic surrender to brightly-hued lights rapidly circling in the sky overhead. This will turn out to be a dream, as Jeanne Tantois (Noémie Merlant) wakes slumped over the desk in her bedroom, surrounded by the little coloured lights of the models that she fell asleep building. Awkward and withdrawn, Jeanne is not very good around people, but she has been obsessed since her childhood with fairground rides, even building elaborate working miniatures of them. That opening close encounter with one in her sleep shows, from the outset, that these ‘attractions’ are a big part of her fantasy life – and tonight she will be working with the real thing, as she begins her first night shift at the local amusement park

The traffic between fantasy and reality is key to _Jumbo_. ‘Inspired by a true story’ reveals text accompanying the title on the screen, even as it becomes clear that the film’s narrative conforms to every detail of cinema’s most fantastical wish-fulfilment genre, the romance. For here we have a meet-cute: falling in love, dreamy sex, obstacles and a rival, with everything culminating in a climactic marriage – even if the object of the protagonist’s desire is not, as her single mother Margarette (Emmanuelle Bercot) would like, Jeanne’s new boss Marc (Bastien Bouillon), but rather the park’s newest ride, the Move It, which Jeanne renames Jumbo, and with which she is soon passing every night in a blissful relationship that she fancies is not one-way.

Trying to get Jeanne to acknowledge a father who has long since left the picture, the straight-talking Margarette tells her daughter, ‘I didn’t make you with my vibrator!’ adding the wry postscript, ‘Unfortunately.’ In fact, Jeanne is more likely than most to appreciate the allure of machinery – but her relationship with Jumbo is, she insists, ‘not about sex, it’s something else.’  Not that sex is entirely absent from the idealised sequences where she frolics with her inanimate inamorato amid pounding pistons, heady lights and oozing oil – but for Jeanne, this is a more profound bond, where her fantasies collide with the metal physicality of the ride, and this shy, introverted woman finds her happy place. These scenes realise the deepest imaginings of Jeanne’s head and her heart, and even if at some level she knows that her _amour_ is of the _fou_ variety, she just does not care. After all, isn’t most love, to varying degrees, a dizzying delusion?

The more grounded Margarette, however, really does care, freaked out and embarrassed by her daughter’s aberrant infatuation, and worried about what it will mean for the standing of both of them in their close, closed-minded community. The woodland town where they live is small – small enough, indeed, that when the stranger Hubert (Sam Louwyck) wanders into the bar where Margarette works, she can instantly tell that he is not from around there. Yet it is the well-travelled, worldly Hubert who will prove the must unfazed by, and open to, Jeanne’s unusual romance. This is where _Jumbo_ flashes its true colours. For though (very) loosely reimagining the real-life story of Amy Wolfe – who in 2009 married a roller coaster in Pennsylvania and assumed the surname of its manufacturer, Weber – the film is also a classic coming-out (as well as coming of age, and just plain coming) narrative, allegorising both the rejection and acceptance faced by anyone whose erotic interests do not adhere to narrowly conventional expectations.

_Jumbo_ initially holds out the promise of amusement-park worker rites of passage like those in Greg Mottola’s _Adventureland_ (2009), but is in fact more akin to the carnival attraction erotics of Clifton Childree’s _The Flew_ (2008), or the object sexuality of Marco Ferreri’s _I Love You_ (1986) and Craig Gillespie’s _Lars and the Real Girl_ (2007), while literalising the carousel caprices of Max Ophuls’s _La Ronde_ (1950). Most of all, though, Wittock takes Jeanne and her feelings entirely seriously, and by showing this idiosyncratic heroine’s experiences from her own internalised perspective the film gives life to the inert form of Jeanne’s ‘ride’ and engenders from the cold steel of Jumbo’s materiality a strangely transcendent magical realism that is nothing short of a miracle. For, like any great romance, _Jumbo_ leaves the viewer wanting to entertain the fantasy and to keep at bay the disillusionments and disappointments of everyday existence. After all, as Jeanne herself puts it, ‘Some people believe in fairytales, don’t they?’ Here, love – Jeanne’s, but also in different ways Margarette’s and Hubert’s – conquers all, defying the gravitational forces of real life.  
**Anton Bitel, _Sight & Sound_, Summer 2021**
<br><br>


**JUMBO**<br>
_Directed by_: Zoé Wittock<br>
©: Insolence Productions, Les Films Fauves, Kwassa Films<br>
Insolence Productions _presents a co-production with_ Les Films Fauves _and_ Kwassa Films<br>
_With the participation of:_ Film Fund Luxembourg _With the help of:_ Centre National du Cinéma et de l’Image Animée, Centre du Cinéma et de l’Audiovisuel de la Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles<br>
_With the support of:_ Eurimages, Tax Shelter du Gouvernement Fédéral Belge via Belga Films Fund _With the participation of:_ Wallimage (Wallonie)<br>
_In co-production with:_ Proximus<br>
_In association with:_ Sofitvcine 6, Belga Productions, Flammes Films<br>
_Producers_: Anaïs Bertrand, Gilles Chanial,  Annabella Nezri  
_Written by_: Zoé Wittock<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Thomas Buelens<br>
_Editor:_ Thomas Fernandez<br>
_Art Director:_ William Abello<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Carine Rando De Felice<br>
_Original Music:_ Thomas Roussel<br>
_Sound:_ Michel Schillings, Mike Butcher,  Ingo Dumlich, Grégory Lannoy, Maxence Dussere, Pascal Jasme<br>

**Cast**<br>
Noémie Merlant _(Jeanne Tantois)_  
Emmanuelle Bercot _(Margarette)_  
Bastien Bouillon _(Marc)_  
Sam Louwyck _(Hubert)_  
Tracy Dossou _(Fati)_

France/Belgium/Luxembourg 2020<br>
93 mins

An Anti-Worlds release
<br><br>

**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**After Love**<br>
Continues from Jun<br>
**Nashville**<br>
Continues from Jun<br>
**Another Round**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Jumbo**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Tove**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Deerskin**<br>
From Fri 16 Jul<br>
**Girlfriends**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
**Mandabi**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
**Limbo**<br>
From Fri 30 Jul<br>
**The Most Beautiful Boy in the World**<br>
From Fri 30 Jul<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMzM0NDM4NDM0XX0=
-->
