---
layout: post
title: Titane
published: false
date: 2021-12-06
readtime: true
categories: ['PREVIEW']
tags: [Horror, Thriller]
metadata: 'France/Belgium 2020, 108 mins<br> Director: Julia Ducournau'
pdf: '2021-12-06-titane.pdf'
---

_+ pre-recorded Q&A with director Julia Ducournau_

**Julia Ducournau on ‘Titane’**

_How did_ Titane _take shape in the writing?_

I sensed I was facing a very complex puzzle, with dense matter that I clearly needed to simplify. But I had to be careful or I’d risk losing the existential scope I was aiming for. It was a real balancing act. To give _Titane_ its definitive shape, I honed in on the character of Vincent [Vincent Lindon] and his fantasy: this idea that through a lie, you can bring love and humanity to life. I wanted to make a film that initially may seem ‘unlovable’ because of its violence, but then we grow deeply attached to the characters, and ultimately we receive the film as a love story. Or rather, a story about the ‘birth of love’ because here, everything is a question of election.

_Can you tell us about the sequence shot following the title that introduces Alexia [Agathe Rousselle] as an adult?_

That sequence is there to impose a certain vision – not my vision – of Alexia, or more accurately, who others want her to be. This vision idealises her, forcefully iconises and sexualises her, makes her obey a whole series of clichés. I see it as a decoy: we’re exploring a surface layer that hints at the ocean we’re about to plunge into, where we’ll discover a femininity with very blurry contours.  I wanted this sequence to be both extremely organic and totally disconnected from reality. The Alexia presented to us here does not align with the truth of  the character.

_Tell us about the casting process that led you to the actress who plays Alexia._

I knew right away she’d have to be an unknown face. As she goes through her ‘mutations’ I didn’t want people thinking they’re watching the transformation of a physically familiar actress. I mentioned above a ‘femininity with blurry contours’. I needed an unknown to embody that. Someone the audience couldn’t project any expectations onto. Someone they could watch transform as the story plays out without being conscious of the artifice. So I went straight to non-professional young women. I had a certain androgynous physique in mind, one that could endure the various transformational states that play out for the camera. I wanted a face that would change with the angle of the shot.  A face that could make us believe anything. So the casting was both vast and precise. I knew there’d be a lot of work for whoever I chose. Not so much rehearsing lines (Alexia is practically mute) but in the acting itself. I’d have to go digging for something inside her, push her to places she wasn’t used to going, and obviously that takes time. When I saw Agathe [Rousselle] for the first time at a casting session, she really stood out. She had the right physique and a fascinating face, but also a presence. She commanded the screen, and that’s exactly what I wanted.

_And for the character of Vincent [Vincent Lindon]?_

For the character of Vincent it was far simpler: I wrote the role for Vincent Lindon. We’ve known each other for a long time. I wanted to film him and show him to everyone the way I see him. His character required a range of emotions that, in my eyes, only he is capable of: at once scary and vulnerable, childlike and dark, deeply human yet monstrous... especially with that impressive hulk of a body. In preparation for the role he did serious weightlifting for a year. I wanted him beefy like an ox, reminding us of Harvey Keitel’s massiveness in Abel Ferrara’s _Bad Lieutenant_. We got along beautifully during the shoot and I’m very proud of that. Vincent trusted me. He accepted the idea of surrendering to the character without necessarily holding all the keys to my cinema. He was exceptionally generous in what he gave to the role and to me. I think I got something from him that he himself was looking for at this stage in his career. I came along at the right time, if you will.

_Can you tell us about some of the many special effects in_ Titane _?_

The biggest challenge by far were the prosthetics Agathe [Rousselle] had to wear. She spent long, laborious hours in make-up every day, which was exhausting for her and stressful for us, as every little touchup obviously takes time. The prosthetics were a central part of our daily schedules. It’s funny, because I’ve been using them since _Junior_ [2011] and every time I say to myself, ‘Never again, too much hassle!’ Then I go right back and do it again on the next film! But the thing is, for actors, prosthetics are true companions in the acting process. And they’re so organic on screen.

_What indicator did you give your DOP Ruben Impens for the cinematography on_ Titane _?_

I often used the word ‘malfunction’ to evoke the film’s transformations. ‘Derailment’ too, because the story is peppered with machines and metal. Ruben and I worked hand in hand. We did the shot list together, the lighting chart together, we were practically joined at the hip on set... We started by figuring out what machinery we’d need on the film, because we shared a frustration from not having played on that more in _Raw_ [2016]. And we discussed how to do something graphic without losing the characters in the process. When it comes to lighting, I work a lot within a cold/hot dichotomy. _Titane_ is concerned with metal and fire, so the cold/hot relationship had to be ever-present. Ruben and I wanted to take a deep dive into contrast. We were constantly flirting with the limit, the limit being the cartoon: one step further and we could fall into cartoonish. We had to stay in the reality of the film. Push the shadow/light envelope as far as we could, without getting lost in an ultra-stylisation that would suck the blood out of the characters and the action.  We focused more on pictorial references than film references, the paintings of Caravaggio in particular. I also showed Ruben ‘Summer Night’ by Winslow Homer and ‘The Empire of Light’ series by Rene Magritte to give him an idea of what I was looking for in the contrasts. I wanted light to spring from the shadows in the same way emotion gushes after an initial shock. I also wanted lots of colours, to break with the darkness of the story and avoid an impression of inescapable sordidness. For the many nude scenes, which I wanted to be as non-sexualised as possible, I tried to use lighting to reinvent the skin each time. Our work with colour made it possible to bring new textures, meanings and emotions to the skin itself.

_For the music you worked with Jim Williams again. What were your specs  for him?_

I asked him to use percussion and bells. And I insisted on the bells. Why? Because I absolutely wanted to incorporate metal into the score. I wanted music that sounded metallic while still being melodic. As with _Raw_, I wanted a memorable recurring theme that would vary according to my characters’ trajectories. _Titane_ goes from animal to impulsive to sacred. To help us feel that progression, the music must also fluctuate, hybridise, transform. We go from percussion to bells to electric guitar and sometimes everything combined.  Then voices come in, bringing a liturgical dimension to the film. I asked Jim to work on creating a momentum towards the sacred. His music also needed to be like bursts of light in the shadows.  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**TITANE**  
_Directed by_: Julia Ducournau  
©: Kazak Productions, Arte France Cinéma,  VOO, Frakas Production  
_Produced by_: Kazak Productions  
_in co-production with_: Frakas Productions,  Arte France Cinéma, VOO, Be TV  
_With the participation of_: Canal+, Ciné+,  ARTE France  
_This film was supported by_:  Creative Europe Media of the European Union, Centre national du cinéma et de l'image animée, Eurimages, Centre du Cinéma et l’Audiovisuel de la Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles, Procirep, L’Angoa  
_In association with_: Cinémage 15, Cofinova 17, Cinémage 13 développement  
_International Sales_: Wild Bunch International  
_Produced by_: Jean-Christophe Reymond  
_Unit Production Manager_: Julien Linieres  
_Assistant Director_: Claire Corbetta-Doll  
_Script Supervisor_: Bénédicte Kermadec  
_Casting_: Christine Baras, Constance Demontoy, Audrey Gatimel  
_Written by_: Julia Ducournau  
_Director of Photography_: Ruben Impens  
_Stills Photography_: Carole Bethuel  
_Visual Effects_: Mac Guff  
_Edited by_: Jean-Christophe Bouzy  
_Production Design_: Laurie Colson, Lise Péault  
_Costume Designer_: Anne-Sophie Gledhill  
_Make-up Designer_: Flore Masson  
_Special Effects Make-up Designer_: Olivier Afonso  
_Hair Designer_: Antoine Mancini  
_Opening Titles_: Claire Allante  
_Original Music_: Jim Williams  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Fabrice Osinski  
_Sound_: Fabrice Osinski, Séverin Favriau,  Stéphane Thiébaut  
_Sound Mixer_: Stéphane Thiébaut  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Emmanuel Lanzi

**Cast**  
Vincent Lindon _(Vincent)_  
Agathe Rousselle _(Alexia/Adrien)_  
Garance Marillier _(Justine)_  
Laïs Salamah _(Rayane)_  
Myriem Akheddiou _(Adrien’s mother)_  
Mara Cissé _(Jeantet)_  
Marin Judas _(Charrier)_  
Diong-Kéba Tacu _(Sissoko)_  
Thibault Cathalifaud _(the fan, tuning show)_  
Bertrand Bonello _(Alexia’s father)_  
Dominique Frot _(the Macarena lady)_

France/Belgium 2020©  
108 mins

Courtesy of Altitude Film Entertainment
<br><br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**TV Preview: The Mezzotint + Q&A with  director Mark Gatiss**<br>
Tue 7 Dec 18:10<br>
**TV Preview: The Tourist + Q&A with actors Jamie Dornan, Danielle Macdonald, Shalom Brune-Franklin and creatives**<br>
Tue 7 Dec 20:30<br>
**Exclusive Preview: Swan Song + pre-recorded Q&A**<br>
Wed 8 Dec 17:15<br>
**Preview: Boiling Point + Q&A with director Philip Barantini and actors Ray Panthaki and Lauryn Ajufo**<br>
Wed 8 Dec 20:30<br>
**TV Preview: Ghosts Christmas Special + Q&A (guests TBA)**<br>
Thu 9 Dec 18:10<br>
**tick, tick… BOOM!**<br>
Thu 9 Dec 20:30<br>
**Patti Boulaye**<br>
Sun 12 Dec 15:30<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera: Bridget Jones’s Diary at 20 + Q&A with director Sharon Maguire**<br>
Thu 16 Dec 18:00<br>
**Preview: Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy (Guzen to sozo)**<br>
Wed 29 Dec 18:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzc4MzExNDk1XX0=
-->
