---
layout: post
title: CODA
published: true
date: 2021-08-13
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USA 2020, 111 mins<br> Director: Siân Heder'
pdf: '2021-08-13-coda-qa.pdf'
---

_This screening will be followed by a specially recorded Q&A with_ CODA _director  Siân Heder and the four cast members of the fictional Rossi family Emilia Jones,  Marlee Matlin, Troy Kotsur and Daniel Durant. The discussion is hosted by Samantha Baines, an award-winning comedian, actor, hearing aid wearer and RNID Ambassador.  It is fully accessible, including both ASL and BSL._

_This Q&A is presented by Apple Original Films and BFI in collaboration with RNID, the charity making life fully inclusive for Deaf people and those with hearing loss or tinnitus._

Oscar winner Marlee Matlin stars as Jackie and Troy Kotsur is her mischievous husband Frank, parents who have created a close knit family unit and have grown to depend on their hearing daughter. Their beautifully nuanced performances (alongside stand-out Emilia Jones as Ruby) allow both Deaf and hearing audiences to understand their challenges. Crisp firecracker exchanges, full of raw humour and moments of tenderness reveal a family on the cusp of change. Their energy is infectious; their anxiety heartfelt.

Siân Heder’s multi-award winning drama (taking Grand Jury Prize and Audience Award at Sundance 2021) is first and foremost a story of community. The soul classic ‘You’re All I Need to Get By’ that links various characters isn’t just a love song. Set in a fishing town on the Massachusetts coast, we see how unfair practice threatens the livelihood of generations. Everyone feels vulnerable, but especially the Rossi’s, with their outsider status.

Beautifully shot, foregrounding the importance of visual and tactile worlds, and with a music driven soundscape that goes to the heart of the drama, this a film to laugh and cry with – many times over.  
**Maggi Hurt, BFI Advance Programme Co-ordinator**

From the beginning, the filmmakers of _CODA_ understood the responsibility they bore to accurately depict Deaf culture and American Sign Language. Many people born Deaf or hard of hearing view their Deafness as a difference, not a disability. For many in the community, being Deaf is a cultural identity, but one doesn’t need to be Deaf to participate in and contribute to Deaf culture. Deaf culture includes hearing people who are CODAs and interpreters, and people who are hard of hearing who identify as Deaf. (It’s also important to note that, just as is the case with hearing culture, there isn’t a single homogenous Deaf culture, but rather many Deaf cultures.)

The use of sign language is a cornerstone of Deaf cultural identity – there are more than 200 sign languages in the world. ASL also has dialects, such as BASL/BSV (Black American Sign Language/Black Sign Variation) and, within the world of hip hop, ASL interpreters have carved out their own cultural and professional niche. Of late, it’s become more common to see ASL interpreters on-screen in the media and on-stage at concerts, and the hearing public has started to appreciate the physical skill and elegant aesthetics of signing, even if they don’t understand the language itself.

ASL and its variants are vibrant, creative and fluid languages that are more than just versions of American English. It can be a challenge to directly translate between ASL and English, partly because ASL is such an embodied language but also because not all words and signs have direct translations.

Practically speaking, that meant that director Siân Heder had to find a way to translate the dialogue she’d written for her characters from the page into ASL. ‘I’m someone who imagines being every character as I’m writing, and I’m hearing all the words in my head,’ Heder says. ‘Part of my process is usually having a few actor friends do me a favour and read the script out loud so I can judge the dialogue. I did a reading of _CODA_ this way in the middle of a rewrite. As I was listening to it, I realised that this was a completely bizarre way to judge the scenes because I’m never going to hear these lines. These lines will be something I watch.’

Heder brought on Deaf actress, dancer, director and educator Alexandria Wailes to serve as the film’s Director of ASL (DASL) to work with her on all the translations that were required. Wailes and Heder sat down together in the spring of 2019, months before the shoot began, to dissect the screenplay. ‘Scene by scene, we went through the script,’ Heder says. ‘She would read a line and sign it for me.’ In certain cases, the sign for what Heder had written didn’t necessarily convey her intentions, so she’d modify the dialogue as needed.

It’s important to note the differences between Wailes’ role and that of an interpreter.  Also known as an ASL master, the DASL is usually an individual with an extensive theatre background and understanding of Deaf culture and history. The DASL essentially functions as a creative collaborator akin to a dramaturg or a choreographer. Depending upon the project, the DASL will identify period-specific, regional and gender sign choices to share and teach those who are performing, then make decisions about which signs best fit the world being envisioned. The DASL also educates the production on how to effectively communicate in a bilingual environment, particularly when it comes to the use of ASL interpreters and empowering Deaf talent.

‘Siân and I went through the script and discussed the possibilities of how this family functions,’ Wailes explains. ‘The dynamics and relationships between characters became clearer and informed us of how the characters would likely communicate. We agreed that as tight-knit as this familial unit was, the father and daughter had an incredible bond.’ Because this family lives in a small fishing town in New England, this also meant some ASL research on specific types of fish and the regional accent.

‘A hearing child born into a family of Deaf people would be exposed to ASL before spoken English,’ Wailes continues. ‘I presented Siân with a template of sign choices for Ruby with a heads up that these choices may evolve once we brought the actors all together and discovered their natural rhythms.’

Because ASL is not a written language, Wailes would write notes for herself in ASL gloss (also known as notation), and she also recorded videos for the cast members for additional reference. ‘It can get very technical and will vary from person to person,’ Wailes says of the way various signs are written down. ‘For the actors who came into the project without any pre-existing knowledge of ASL, I worked from my gloss, teaching and modifying if necessary, then giving the actor suggestions on how to notate for their own memorisation. Some folks draw pictures. Some circle or underline words, adding info on the margins. Some video record themselves, and there are others who have incredible muscle memory and keep it in their head and body.’

At the same time, Heder was also working with her behind-the-scenes team on the look of the film in preparation for the shoot. _CODA_ was shot on location in and around Gloucester, Massachusetts, in the fall of 2019, visiting the city’s wharves, Cape Pond Ice and the Cape Ann Seafood Exchange, as well as Henry’s Market in Beverly.

Heder relied on two previous collaborators, cinematographer Paula Huidobro and production designer Diane Lederman – with whom she had worked on both her feature film debut _Tallulah_ and the series _Little America_ – to help her execute her vision for _CODA_.

Both Huidobro and Lederman took aesthetic cues from Gloucester itself and the greater North Shore area to help create the look and feel of Ruby’s world. ‘The colour palette for the film came from the ocean and the fishing town,’ Huidobro says. ‘A big part of the movie is the community, the fishing and the boats.’ Lederman adds, ‘I spent a lot of my prep time with Siân looking at Gloucester and getting a feel for the natural landscape and environment. We wanted to really capture the fishing environment here, so we went to several fish processing plants – there are only a few left because the sad story of Gloucester is that the fishing industry has really been hit hard.’

Amid the movie’s somewhat neutral landscape are bright pops of colour – blues, reds, yellows and oranges. ‘Fishing involves a lot of plastic and bright colours, which I usually don’t use,’ Lederman explains. ‘The fishermen all wear their bright yellow and orange Grundens. All the tie lines are these bright colours, and there are these big plastic blue bins everywhere. You couldn’t fight it, so we embraced it. We really wanted to capture the spirit of this environment, this town, the people. We strived to make it as natural and realistic as possible. This movie is a very visual film because of the places we’re shooting but also because we’re trying to capture what it feels like to be young, to fall in love for the first time and to discover your passion and your path,’ adds Huidobro. ‘We also wanted to capture what it feels like to be in a tight-knit family and the way that Deaf people perceive things differently and have to be a lot more aware of their surroundings.’  
**Production notes**
<br><br>


**CODA**  
_Directed by_: Siân Heder  
_©_: Vendôme Pictures LLC, Pathé Films  
_Production Company_: Vendome Pictures  
_In association with_: Pathé  
_Presented by_: Apple Original Films  
_With the participation of the_:  Canadian Film or Video Production Services Tax Credit  
_International Sales_: Pathé International  
_Executive Producers_: Ardavan Safaee, Sarah Borch-Jacobsen  
_Produced by_: Philippe Rousselet, Fabrice Gianfermi, Patrick Wachsberger, Jérôme Seydoux  
_Unit Production Manager_: Ged Dickersin  
_Production Supervisor_: Jill Sacco  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Feifei Ling  
_Production Accountant_: Sabrina Joseph  
_Location Manager_: Tim Gorman  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Guy Langlois  
_1st Assistant Director_: David Mendoza  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Pete Waterman  
_Script Supervisor_: Jillian Roache  
_Casting by_: Deborah Aquila, Tricia Wood, Lisa Zagoria  
_Screenplay by_: Siân Heder  
_Based on the original motion picture_ La Famille Bélier _a film by_: Eric Lartigau  
_Based on the original motion picture_ La Famille Bélier _written by_: Victoria Bedos, Stanislas Carré de Malberg, Eric Lartigau, Thomas Bidegain  
_Director of Photography_: Paula Huidobro  
_A Camera Operator/Steadicam Operator_: Alec Jarnagin  
_B Camera Operator_: Scott Lebeda  
_Gaffer_: Ben Heald  
_Key Grip_: Frank Montesanto  
_Special Effects Co-ordinator_: Michael Ricci  
_Editor_: Geraud Brisson  
_Production Designer_: Diane Lederman  
_Art Director_: Paul Richards  
_Set Designer_: Chantal Birdsong  
_Set Decorator_: Vanessa Knoll  
_Property Master_: Kent Lanigan  
_Construction Co-ordinator_: Peter Wilcox  
_Costume Designer_: Brenda Abbandandolo  
_Costume Supervisor_: Courtney Stephens  
_Make-up Department Head_:  Juliet Loveland  
_Hair Department Head_: Michelle Connolly  
_Composer_: Marius De Vries  
_Music Supervisor_: Alexandra Patsavas  
_Executive Music Producer_:  Marius De Vries  
_Music Produced by_: Nick Baxter  
_Music Editor_: Delphine Measroch  
_Songs Mixed by_: Nick Baxter  
_Sound Design_: Paul Col  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Jared Detsikas  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Alexandra Fehrman, Stéphane Bergeron  
_Supervising Sound Editor_:  Martin Pinsonnault  
_Sound Effects Editor_: David Tremblay  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Mark Pettograsso  
_American Sign Language Masters_:  Anne Tomasetti, Alexandria Wailes

**Cast**  
Emilia Jones _(Ruby Rossi)_  
Eugenio Derbez _(Bernardo Villalobos)_  
Troy Kotsur _(Frank Rossi)_  
Ferdia Walsh-Peelo _(Miles)_  
Daniel Durant _(Leo Rossi)_  
Amy Forsyth _(Gertie)_  
Kevin Chapman _(Brady)_  
Marlee Matlin _(Jackie Rossi)_  
John Fiore _(Tony Salgado)_  
Lonnie Farmer _(Arthur)_  
Courtland Jones _(Ms Simon)_  
Molly Beth Thomas _(Audra)_  
Ayana Brown _(guidance counsellor)_  
Jason Pugatch _(doctor)_  
Kyana Fanene _(riff girl)_  
Anilee List _(Adele girl)_  
Stone Martin _(Harry Potter boy)_  
Maeve Chapman _(shaker girl)_  
Stephen Caliskan _(tall boy)_  
Amanda Bradshaw _(shy girl)_

USA 2020  
111 mins  
Certificate 12A

An Apple Original Films release

Presented with subtitles for the D/deaf  and those experiencing hearing loss.

Audio description available.
<br><br>

**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Limbo**<br>
Continues from Fri 30 Jul<br>
**The Most Beautiful Boy in the World**<br>
From Sun 1 Aug<br>
**Now, Voyager**<br>
From Fri 6 Aug<br>
**The Sparks Brothers**<br>
From Fri 6 Aug<br>
**The Story of a Three Day Pass**<br>
From Sat 7 Aug<br>
**CODA**<br>
From Fri 13 Aug<br>
**Censor**<br>
From Fri 20 Aug<br>
**Souad**<br>
From Fri 27 Aug<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTIwMDE2ODAxMTddfQ==
-->
