---
layout: post
title: The London Palladium Show
published: true
date: 2021-11-27
readtime: true
categories: ['MISSING BELIEVED WIPED']
tags: [Television]
metadata: 
pdf: '2021-11-27-MBW-1.pdf'
---

**His Lordship Entertains**<br>
A change of channels for the crusty old peer Lord Rustless, who had earlier been seen in two series of _Hark at Barker_ on ITV. The remainder of the cast, and the setting, Chrome Hall, also made the switch.

In this show, Chrome Hall had been opened as a hotel, but various obstacles had to be overcome to make it a success. The ITV episodes had seen Barker cast in a bewildering number of additional roles; here he was just plain Rustless. He did write the seven episodes, however, hiding beneath the pseudonym Jonathan Cobbald.<br>
**Mark Lewsiohn, _RadioTimes Guide to TV Comedy_, 1998**

Though the whole series was thought lost, the first episode resurfaced as a b/w telerecording over a decade ago. However this episode has now undergone a revolutionary colour recovery process and will be presented here in a colour version for the first time since the original broadcast.

**The London Palladium Show**  
With Jack Parnell and his Orchestra, The Palladium Dancers, The Mike Sammes Singers, Fess Parker, Rudolf Nureyev and Svetlana Benosora, Dickie Henderson, The Seekers and Dave Allen.

This is the US broadcast version of _The London Palladium Show_ which was the second series of the Palladium revival show (which for its first season had been called _The New London Palladium Show_). This edition was located at the New York Public Library.<br>

Grateful thanks to:  
Chris Perry  
Ray Frensham  
Robert Reinstein  
The Kaleidoscope Team  
The BFI Technical Team<br>


**HIS LORDSHIP ENTERTAINS**<br>
**EPISODE 1: THE FOOD INSPECTOR**<br>
_Producer:_ Harold Snoad<br>
_Written by:_ Jonathan Cobbald \[Ronnie Barker]<br>

**Main cast**<br>
Ronnie Barker _(Lord Rustless)_<br>
Josephine Tewson _(Mildred Bates)_<br>
David Jason _(Dithers)_<br>
Mary Baxter _(cook)_<br>
Moira Foot _(Effie)_<br>
Frank Gatliff _(Badger)_  <br>

ITV tx 5.6.1972<br>
UK 1972<br>
30 mins<br>

**THE LONDON PALLADIUM SHOW**<br>
_Directors:_ Albert Locke, Colin Clews<br>

**With**<br>
Millicent Martin<br>
Dickie Henderson<br>
The Seekers<br>
Dave Allen<br>

ITV tx 6.11.1966<br>
50 mins<br>
UK 1966<br>

TRT 120 mins<br>


**THE PRECIOUS THINGS**<br>
**1970s Odd Pop and Rare Rock**<br>
Sat 11 Dec 15:00<br>
**An Evening with Vincent Price: Vincent Price Is in the Country + Aspel and Company**<br>
Sat 11 Dec 17:50<br>
**Neil Innes and Terry Jones: East of the Moon (+ intro by producer Joy Whitby) + The Innes Book of Records**<br>
Fri 17 Dec 18:10<br>
**Christmas Specials of Yesteryear: Magpie + Max Headroom’s Giant Christmas Turkey**<br>
Sat 18 Dec 18:20<br>
<br>


**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

