---
layout: post
title: Encanto
published: true
date: 2021-11-21
readtime: true
categories: ['BFI FAMILIES PREVIEW']
tags: [Children, Animation]
metadata: 'USA 2021, 105 mins<br> Directors: Jared Bush, Byron Howard'
pdf: '2021-11-21-encanto.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with director Jared Bush, co-director Charise Castro Smith, producer Clark Spencer and actor Stephanie Beatriz._

**What’s it about?**  
The Madrigal family live in an enchanted village in the mountains of Colombia. Every child but one in their magical house has been granted a unique ability such as strength or healing powers. Mirabel, the only ordinary Madrigal, discovers that the magic is under threat and she may be the only one able to save it. Directed by the team behind _Zootropolis_ and with songs by Lin-Manuel Miranda, this animated musical fantasy is going to be magical.

**‘Even in our darkest moments, there’s light where you least expect it.’**  
Before the setting was chosen, before even a single character was imagined, the filmmakers behind Walt Disney Animation Studios’ all-new original feature film _Encanto_ had decided what the heart of their new film would be: family. _Encanto_ explores the compelling but complicated relationships within families. ‘We thought it would be amazing to tell a story about not just a pair of characters but a large extended family,’ says director Byron Howard (Oscar®-winning director of _Zootopia_, _Tangled_). ‘We wanted to celebrate and try to understand how the complex dynamics in big families really work. How well do we know our families? How well do they know us?’

Adds director and screenwriter Jared Bush (co-director/co-writer _Zootopia_, writer _Moana_), ‘It’s a story about how the people who are closest to us, especially family members, don’t always see us – or fully understand us. And likewise, we don’t show people we love our whole selves for many reasons. Our story shows how one member of a family who feels the least seen can learn to see her whole family and ultimately herself.’

_Encanto_ tells the tale of an extraordinary family, the Madrigals, who live hidden in the mountains of Colombia, in a magical house, in a vibrant town, in a wondrous, charmed place called an _Encanto_. The magic of the _Encanto_ has blessed every child in the family with a unique gift from super strength to the power to heal – every child except one, Mirabel. But when she discovers that the magic surrounding the _Encanto_ is in danger, Mirabel decides that she, the only ordinary Madrigal, might just be her exceptional family’s last hope.  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**ENCANTO**  
_Directed by_: Jared Bush, Byron Howard  
_Co-directed by_: Charise Castro Smith  
_©_: Disney Enterprises Inc.  
_Executive Producer_: Jennifer Lee  
_Associate Producer_: Bradford Simonsen  
_Production Manager_: Stephanie Hachem  
_Post-production Producer_: Bérénice Robinson  
_Technical Supervisor_: Thaddeus P. Miller  
_Casting by_: Jamie Sparer Roberts  
_Screenplay_: Charise Castro Smith, Jared Bush  
_Story by_: Jared Bush, Charise Castro Smith, Jason Hand, Nancy Kruse, Lin-Manuel Miranda  
_Heads of Story_: Jason Hand, Nancy Kruse  
_Director of Cinematography Layout_: Nathan Detroit Warner  
_Directors of Cinematography Lighting_: Alessandro Jacomini, Daniel Rice  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: Scott Kersavage  
_Heads of Animation_: Renato Dos Anjos, Kira Lehtomaki  
_Edited by_: Jeremy Milton  
_Production Designer_: Ian S. Gooding  
_Original Songs by_: Lin-Manuel Miranda  
_Original Score Composed by_: Germaine Franco  
_Orchestra Conducted by_: Anthony Parnther  
_Sound Design_: Nia Hansen  
_Re-recording Mixers_: David E. Fluhr, Gabriel Guy  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Shannon Mills  
_Created and Produced at_: Walt Disney Animation Studios

**Voice cast**    
Stephanie Beatriz _(Mirabel)_  
María Cecilia Botero _(Abuela Alma)_  
John Leguizamo _(Bruno)_  
Mauro Castillo _(Félix)_  
Jessica Darrow _(Luisa)_  
Angie Cepeda _(Julieta)_  
Carolina Gaitán _(Pepa)_  
Diane Guerrero _(Isabela)_  
Wilmer Valderrama _(Agustín)_  
Rhenzy Feliz _(Camilo)_  
Ravi Cabot-Conyers _(Antonio)_  
Adassa _(Dolores)_  
Maluma _(Mariano)_  
Rose Portillo _(Señora Guzmán)_  
Noemi Josefina Flores _(Young Mirabel)_  
Juan Castano _(Osvaldo)_  
Sarah-Nicole Robles _(Señora Ozma)_  
Hector Elias _(Old Arturo)_  
Alan Tudyk _(toucan)_  
Olga Merediz _(singing voice of Abuela Alma)_  
Jorge E. Ruiz Cano _(Tiple Maestro)_  
Alyssa Bella Candiani, Noemi Josefina Flores, Paisley Day Herrera, Brooklyn Skylar Rodriguez, Ezra Rudulph _(town kids)_

USA 2021  
105 mins

Courtesy of Walt Disney Studios
<br><br>

**FAMILIES**  
**Preview: Buladó**  
Sat 27 Nov 15:10  
**Funday TV preview: Terry Pratchett’s The Abominable Snow Baby + Q&A**  
Sat 4 Dec 12:00  
**The Muppet Christmas Carol**  
Sat 18 Dec 11:45  
**Frozen**  
Sun 19 Dec 12:50
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**




<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTA0NjY1MzAxN119
-->
