---
layout: post
title: Love + Q&A
published: true
date: 2021-12-04
readtime: true
categories: ['BUSTING THE BIAS']
tags: [Shorts]
metadata: 'UK 2021, 19 mins<br>Director: Jane Ashmore'
pdf: '2021-12-04-love.pdf'
---

The creative team behind _Love_ will be discussing disability, inclusivity and diversity within the film landscape and opening up the conversation about normalising creative support throughout the industry.

Rather than a film ‘about’ autism, _Love_ invites its audience to consider the world from the point of view of an autistic person. The film’s writer Gemma Harvey, long-standing Creative Support for leading actor Jules Robertson, wanted to challenge the common misconception that autistic people don’t experience emotion. Using the power of film and its empathic qualities, she takes the audience along for the ride on deeply-felt and amplified emotions and the bewilderment involved in trying to navigate the complexities of human emotion, and where friendship ends and love begins.

The filmmakers – an almost exclusively female team – aimed to tell an autistic person’s story in a manner that reflects the way that autistic people often explain how they experience the world. Director Jane Ashmore uses sound as a hyperreal experience, both in the environmental sound which affects the central character and in his use of music as a refuge and as a guide to navigate the social conundrums he encounters.

Creating the opportunity for an autistic actor to tell this story was of equal importance to the team. It is hoped that with each film casting disabled actors, who bring lived experience to a role, the film industry will become braver in including more disability diversity in the future.
<br><br>

**BUSTING THE BIAS**<br>
**Press Reset on Ableism  and pre-recorded keynote by Andrew Miller MBE + Disability On Screen: Past, Present and Future**<br>
Fri 3 Dec 12:45<br>
**TAPE Community Music and Film panel discussion  + UK Premiere: Approaching Shadows**<br>
Fri 3 Dec 15:00<br>
**Love + Q&A**<br>
Sat 4 Dec 13:30<br>
**It’s Personal + Q&A**<br>
Sat 4 Dec 15:15<br>
**Talking Bodies:  A Rehearsed Reading  & Q&A**<br>
Sun 5 Dec 14:00<br>
**Aimee Victoria + Q&A  + The Multi**<br>
Sun 5 Dec 16:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzY4MTAxOTYwXX0=
-->
