---
layout: post
title: The Namesake
published: true
date: 2021-07-14
readtime: true
categories: ['T A P E  PRESENTS<br> BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM &#63']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'UK 2006, 122 mins<br> Director: Mira Nair'
pdf: '2021-07-14-namesake.pdf'
---

_Wednesday 14 July’s screening will be introduced by three young poets who will explore names as a source of both power and significance._

**Mira Nair on ‘The Namesake’**

_How did you get involved in_ The Namesake _?_

I read the book by chance on a plane and I recognised a deep sense of loss. I was going to make _Homebody/Kabul_ [a Tony Kushner play] – it was financed, cast and written – but I put it aside. I raised the money for _The Namesake_ on no script, just on the gift of the gab – 1 million bucks. Then in July 2005 we finished a first draft and by the end of August we were shooting. It was madness, but it was a private little madness. It wasn’t like, ‘I’m gonna make an epic’, more, ‘Screw the rest, I’m doing this.’ As one Hollywood person said, it’s a non-Caucasian film on a Caucasian budget.

_What were the main challenges in adapting Jhumpa Lahiri’s bestseller?_

I grew up in Calcutta so I knew it from the inside – as opposed to Jhumpa, who knew it as a visitor. This gave me a strong idea of how to film the city. Jhumpa felt an amazing sense of security because of the things I said to her: details from her book that prompted more details. She almost became the visitor in my childhood backyard.

The book had enough air in it to be filmed in a certain visual way. The key to making a 30-year saga in two hours is in the transitions. Every moment has to maximise the intention and it’s hard to do so without the usual tacky subtitles and voiceovers and crap that I just don’t find cinematic. It’s the visual/emotional axis I need to nail, and here it was about shooting both locations as if they were one. This is the state of being of an immigrant who looks out of the window and sees the Ganges instead of the Hudson. I needed that motif to propel me into the narrative.

_Typical of your insider’s insight is the scene where the ashes are scattered while boys play on the beach._

I’m a shameless populist. In India funerals are always moving for exactly this reason – that children will somersault in the same river in which you throw your husband’s ashes. And there will be a boatman singing the Baul songs, which I have always loved but which have never found a home in my other movies.

_Was there anything in the book that was difficult?_

The character of Gogol is a little passive; I was more interested in his parents. We looked at his litany of love affairs and decided to skip his high-school and college days. There are two major relationships: with Maxine, the American girlfriend he lives with, and later with Moushumi, a would-be sophisticate who wants to be French. I thought that was fabulously unpredictable – and yet I’ve seen her: the slick, re-invented immigrant. I spiced her up a bit with _Bonjour Tristesse_ and other things I used to read when I was that pretentious age.

_Do you consider the difference in emotional temperature between India and the west when you’re making a film like this?_

I go for what comes from me, and that is a medley of these temperatures, knowing that in India we go too much into overt melodrama but also that the core of that melodrama is real. With _Salaam Bombay!_, for instance, I wanted to make a film for the street kids who go to the theatre in Bombay for an air-conditioned three hours. I didn’t want to make an obscure film that Cannes would have loved and no one in Bombay would have seen.

_How do you decide which films to do?_

It’s not always easy. I can’t do full-on bleak and the wonderful thing with  
_The Namesake_ is the rhythm in the audience of belly laughs, then sobs, then laughter again. I thought it was a fluke when I first sat in on an audience but now I’ve seen it four times and what happens is that the laughter allows the sorrow to be sweeter and the sorrow welcomes the laughter all the more.

_The criss-crossing of registers between American action and Indian stillness is very effective._

That’s the point really. I love that stillness of our parents’ generation. There’s nothing else like it, especially in manic America where all of us are constantly checking the phone or the computer. If you have tea with my father-in-law, he will have to talk to you and there’s a gravitas and an openness about life – but only when having tea.

_Tell me about the film’s phrase: ‘We all come out of Gogol’s overcoat.’_

Ashoke believes that the Russian writer Gogol was the precursor of a lot of other stylists such as Chekhov and Dostoevsky, and that therefore we all came out of Gogol’s ‘The Overcoat’. That’s the way Ashoke the intellectual thinks, but Ashoke the father tells his son they are all there because he was saved by Gogol’s book in the train crash.

_My favourite scene is when Ashoke arrives in the sterile university room and arranges his few possessions._

The sterility of the room is not described in the book. That all-white look came from a terrible image I saw when my mother-in-law was in hospital in New York after an operation. Three days into her recovery she went into a convulsion and there was hardly any care. Finally we convinced them that she needed intensive care and then a battery of nurses came and threw us out of her room. An hour later I was told to go back and lock up and when I walked in it was strewn with tubes and wrappers like a tsunami had struck. I opened her closet and there were her perfect Ferragamo shoes and carefully hung saris and this fragrance – an oasis of calm in the chaos – and I knew in that moment that she would never wear those shoes again. I wouldn’t have made this film had I not experienced loss in that primal way.<br>
**Interview by Nick James, _Sight & Sound_, April 2007**
<br>

**THE NAMESAKE**<br>
_Directed by:_ Mira Nair<br>
_©:_ Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation, TCF Hungary Film Rights Exploitation Limited Liability Company<br>
_Production Companies:_ Mirabai Films, Cine Mosaic<br>
_Presented by:_ Fox Searchlight Pictures, Entertainment FARM, UTV Motion Pictures<br> 
_Released by:_ Twentieth Century Fox<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Yasushi Kotani, Taizo Son, Ronnie Screwvala<br>
_Produced by:_ Lydia Dean Pilcher, Mira Nair<br>
_Co-producers:_ Lori Keith Douglas, Yukie Kito, Zarina Screwvala<br>
_Indian Unit Line Producer:_ Anadil Hossain<br>
_Associate Producer:_ Dinaz Stafford<br>
_For Cine Mosaic:_ Thomas De Napoli, Ashley Rudden<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Sean Hogan<br>
_Unit Production Manager:_ Lori Keith Douglas<br>
_Location Manager:_ Kellie Morrison<br>
_Indian Unit Location Manager:_ Chandan Das<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ Michael DeCasper<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Robyn Aronstam<br>
_Casting:_ Cindy Tolan<br>
_Associate Casting:_ Matt Schreiber<br>
_Indian Unit Casting:_ Tess Joseph<br>
_Screenplay by:_ Sooni Taraporevala<br>
_Based on the novel by:_ Jhumpa Lahiri<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Frederick Elmes<br>
_2nd Unit Director of Photography:_ Jay J. Odedra<br>
_Camera Operator:_ Gerard Sava<br>
_Key Grip:_ Tim Smythe<br>
_Indian Unit Key Grip:_ Ninad Nayampally<br>
_Gaffer:_ Jonathan Lumley<br>
_Visual Effects by:_ Ampersand Company<br>
_Editor:_ Allyson C. Johnson<br>
_Assistant Editor:_ David A. Smith<br>
_Production Designer:_ Stephanie Carroll<br>
_Art Director:_ Suttirat Larlarb<br>
_Property Master:_ Jeff Butcher<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Arjun<br>
_Key Make-up Artist:_ Kelly Gleason<br>
_Key Hairstylist:_ Peg<br>
_Titles/Graphics Designed by:_ Divya Thakur, Design Temple<br>
_Music:_ Nitin Sawhney<br>
_Additional Source Music Courtesy of:_ Killer Tracks<br> 
_Orchestra Performed by:_ Philharmonia Orchestra<br>
_Leader:_ Maya Iwabuchi<br>
_Flute:_ K. Srinivasan<br>
_Santoor:_ Ulhas Bapat<br>
_Sarangi:_ Dilshat Khan<br>
_Sitar:_ Niladri Kumar<br>
_Swarlin:_ Rajinder Singh<br>
_Tabla:_ Satyajit Talwalkar<br>
_Violin:_ Deepak Pandit<br>
_Female Vocalists:_ Mitali Bhawmik, Reshmin Chowdhury<br>
_Conductor:_ Stephen Hussey<br>
_Sound Mixer:_ Ed Novick<br>
_Boom Operator:_ Linda Murphy<br>
_Re-recording Mixers:_ Dominick Tavella, Dave Paterson<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Dave Paterson<br>
_Dialogue Editors:_ Brian Bowles, Mary Ellen Porto<br>
_Sound Effects Editor:_ Damian Volpe<br>
_For-Gurus of Cinema with Love & Salaams:_ Ritwik Ghatak, Satyajit Ray<br>
_Indian Unit Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Allen Amin<br>
_Bengali Dialect Coach:_ Arun Dasgupta<br>

**Cast**<br>
Kal Penn _(Gogul Ganguli)_<br>
Tabu _(Ashima)_<br>
Irrfan Khan _(Ashoke Ganguli)_<br>
Jacinda Barrett _(Maxine)_<br>
Zuleika Robinson _(Moushumi Mazumdar)_<br>
Brooke Smith _(Sally)_<br>
Sahira Nair _(Sonia)_<br>
Linus Roache _(Mr Lawson)_<br>
Glenne Headly _(Lydia)_<br>
Amy Wright _(Pam)_<br>
Jagannath Guha _(Ghosh)_<br>
Ruma Guha Thakurta _(Ashoke’s mother)_<br>
Sandip Deb _(music teacher)_<br>
Sukanya _(Rini)_<br>
Tanushree Shankar _(Ashima’s mother)_<br>
Sabyasachi Chakraborty _(Ashima’s father)_<br>
Tamal Ray Choudhury _(Ashoke’s father)_<br>
Dhruv Mookerji _(Rana)_<br>
Supriya Devi _(Ashima’s grandmother)_<br>
Stuart Rudin _(crazy wino)_<br>
Heather MacRae _(Nurse Patty)_<br>
Sumitra, Kanti _(Calcutta house staff)_<br>
Michael Countryman _(Mr Wilcox)_<br>
Kousik Bhowal _(Dr Gupta)_<br>
Rupak Ginn _(uncle)_<br>
Soham Chatterjee _(Gogol, age 4)_<br>
Gargi Mukherjee _(Mira Mashi)_<br>
Pallavi Shah _(Kajol Mashi)_<br>
Jhumpa Lahiri _(Jhumpa Mashi)_<br>
Noor Lahiri Vourvoulias _(baby Sonia)_<br>
Josh Grisetti _(Jerry)_<br>
Kalpen Modi _(Nikhil)_<br>
Justin Rosini _(Marc)_<br>
Dan McCabe _(Bart)_<br>
Bobby Steggert _(Jason)_<br>
B.C. Parikh _(Mr Mazumdar)_<br>
Sibani Biswas _(Mrs Mazumdar)_<br>
Lakhan Das _(Baul singer)_<br>
Kharaj Mukherjee _(Chotu)_<br>
Daniel Gerrol _(Gerald)_<br>
Christie Moreau _(phone operator)_<br>
Jo Yang _(Ms Lu)_<br>
Krishna Dikshit _(funeral priest)_<br>
Kartik Das _(boat man)_<br>
Gary Cowling _(hotel manager)_<br>
Sudipta Bhawmik _(Subroto Mesho)_<br>
Gretchen Egolf _(Astrid)_<br>
Baylen Thomas _(Blake)_<br>
Jeb Brown _(Oliver)_<br>
Jessica Blank _(Edith)_<br>
Mia Yoo _(Viola)_<br>
Benjamin Bauman _(Donald)_<br>
Sebastian Roché _(Pierre)_<br>
Maxmiliano Hernandez _(Ben)_<br>
Partha Chatterjee _(reformed Hindoo)_<br>
Mitali Bhawmik _(singing voice)_<br>

USA/India/Japan 2006©<br>
122 mins<br>
<br>

**T A P E PRESENTS: BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM?**<br>
**The Namesake**<br>
Wed 14 Jul 17:40 (+ live spoken-word performance); Wed 21 Jul 20:40<br>
**What Will People Say (Hva vil folk si)**<br>
Fri 16 Jul 20:30; Sat 31 Jul 17:30<br>
**Binti**<br>
 Mon 19 Jul 20:40<br>
**While We Live (Medan vi lever)**<br>
 Tue 20 Jul 20:30<br>
**In Conversation with Nikesh Shukla**<br>
Fri 23 Jul 18:20<br>
**Pinky**<br>
Sat 24 Jul 11:40<br>
**Lilting**<br>
Sat 24 Jul 17:20; Fri 30 Jul 20:40<br>
**Head-On (Gegen die Wand)**<br>
Tue 27 Jul 20:40<br>
**Shoot the Messenger + Q&A with director Ngozi Onwurah, hosted by T A P E’s Angela Moneke**<br>
Thu 29 Jul 17:45<br>
**Culture Shock: Short Film Programme + Q&A with UNDR LNDN**<br>
Fri 30 Jul 17:40<br>

**T A P E** was founded in 2015 as a response to the lack of representation on screen.  
Find out more about this curatorial collective at **tapecollective.co.uk**
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
