---
layout: post
title: Fargo
published: true
date: 2021-06-11
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES AND RE-RELEASES']
tags: [Crime, Thriller, Drama]
metadata: 'USA, 1995, 98 mins<br> Director: Joel Coen'
pdf: '2021-06-11-fargo.pdf'
---
‘We wrote the part of Carl specifically for Steve (as we wrote the parts of Marge for Fran, and Grim for Peter) because somehow it was appropriate that amongst all these second-generation Scandinavians we had a real Scandinavian. This is the fourth movie that we have done with Steve – unfortunately we have always just had little parts for him in the past.

We are aware of his [psychotic] persona in other movies and wanted to push that in a specific direction. We wanted to write something substantial because he is so good. We first cast him in _Miller’s Crossing_ because we were looking for someone who could talk incredibly fast. Carl’s part is the most verbal in _Fargo_ – he is the motormouth and maybe it is connected to that.’ (Joel Coen)

A quiet opening caption insists on the factual basis of _Fargo_, although it avoids prefacing the film with the most dispiriting rubric in the language: ‘based on a true story’. We are told that something very like this impossible, _Blood Simple_-ish story did in fact happen in the Coen Brothers’ home state of Minnesota in 1987. The first melancholy shot of one cat dragging another through a blinding white blizzard to a wonderful Carter Burwell arrangement of the hymn ‘The Lost Sheep’ is followed by our introduction to the rubber-faced sad sack that William H. Macy makes of the protagonist Jerry Lundegaard. These images signal just how different this film will be. It’s a departure, not only from the dreary parade of True Crime television movies released in the UK by Odyssey Video such as _The Amy Fisher Story_, but also from such comparable aren’t-folks-funny, talk-show dramatisations as _I Love You to Death_.

We are given only telling hints of the circumstances that have brought the likeable but clearly doomed Jerry to Fargo but everything is made heartbreakingly clear by his brief telephone conversations with a bank official who needs clarification of a form Jerry has deliberately fudged to clear a loan. Later, we see his dreams die during a couple of crushing meetings with his overbearing, wealthy and subtly bullying father-in-law, to whom he has brought an investment but who is unwilling to underwrite Jerry’s own involvement in the deal. ‘This would be a good thing for Jean and Scotty and me,’ Jerry claims, only to have the rich Wade snort, ‘Jean and Scotty never have to worry about money’. Jerry is a tragic figure but also a clown (with a mouth like Joe E. Lewis’).

_Fargo_ is a further demonstration of Joel Coen’s remarkable ability to mix comedy with horror. The film operates a certain double standard in its characterisations. Jean, for instance, is relegated to the status of a joke, with her squeaky voice and the slapstick inflicted on her (blind-folded by the kidnappers, she runs around like a headless chicken in the snow). She winds up casually murdered off-screen. Meanwhile, the one-scene sub-plot character of Marge Gunderson’s nervy old flame, who has a disastrous reunion with the police chief in Minneapolis, segues from stooge to tragic figure when it is revealed that his story of recent widowerhood is all a fantasy.

Joel Coen has always – like his best known character Barton Fink – been open to charges of asking us to laugh at the disadvantaged provincials about whom he spins stories. He has spotlighted the redneck grunge of Texas in _Blood Simple_ and the backwoods whininess of the locals in _Raising Arizona_. Here, on his home turf, he allows a great deal of regional humour, joking at the expense of ‘ya ya’ Scandiwegian locals who wander about with ear-flaps down through biting winds and acres of white snow.

The waddling Marge, played by Joel’s wife and long-time collaborator Frances McDormand, may be a maternal Columbo, whose ethnic and character quirks disguise a penetrating detective ability, but a great many other characters are amusingly dim-witted, peculiarly-accented and ‘funny looking’. These specimens range from the hooker who is cheerfully only able to remember of a client that ‘he wasn’t circumcised’ to the touchy kidnapper, Carl Showalter, who gets into a trivial and ultimately fatal argument about money just after he has squirrelled away a never-to-be-reclaimed million dollars in cash.

As with _Blood Simple_, the Coens prove themselves masters of orchestrating cross-purposes plots, with half-thought-out criminal schemes going awry in ways that are surprising and yet obvious, ironic and yet horrifying. Whereas the earlier film presented a quartet of corrupt characters whose double crosses are understood only by the audience and the dead, _Fargo_ offers McDormand (incidentally, the sole survivor of _Blood Simple_’s plot) as a detective who through intuition, logic and luck does penetrate the backstory.

The real heart of the film is in Marge’s understated relationship with her slobbish artist husband, Norm Gunderson, whose last-reel compromised triumph is that he sells a bird painting to be reproduced on the three-cent stamp. His tepid triumph is wearying enough to maybe make her look up that old flame, but the relationship still provides a warmth that gives her a strength none of the other characters – whose homes are seen to be stifling or freezing – can manage. Snuggling with her husband, and cheering him up by pointing out that people need small change stamps whenever the mail prices go up, Marge finally admits that she can’t understand why the people whose trail she has followed have acted with such desperation. Here, with chilling but touching directness, Coen cuts his amusing but distanced comic approach and shows a heart that matches his undoubted skill.<br>
**Kim Newman, _Sight & Sound_, June 1996**
<br><br>

**FARGO**<br>
_Director:_ Joel Coen<br>
_©:_ PolyGram Film Productions, BV<br>
_Production Companies:_ PolyGram Filmed Entertainment, Working Title Films<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner<br>
_Producer:_ Ethan Coen<br>
_Line Producer:_ John Cameron<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Mindy Sheldon<br>
_Production Co-ordinator:_ Karen Ruth Getchell<br>
_Working Title Head of Production:_ Jane Frazer<br>
_Working Title Head of Business Affairs:_ Angela Morrison<br>
_Unit Production Manager:_ Gilly Ruben<br>
_Location Manager:_ Robert J. Graf<br>
_Assistant Location Manager:_ Rachel L.T. Kapel<br>
_Post-production Supervisor:_ Margaret Hayes<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ Michelangelo Csaba Bolla<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ T. Kukovinski<br>
_Casting:_ John Lyons<br>
_Casting Associate:_ Christine Sheaks<br>
_Location Casting:_ Jane Brody<br>
_Screenplay:_ Ethan Coen, Joel Coen<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Roger Deakins<br>
_Camera Operator:_ Robin Brown<br>
_1st Assistant Camera:_ Andy Harris<br>
_2nd Assistant Camera:_ Adam Gilmore<br>
_Key Grip:_ Mitch Lillian<br>
_Special Effects Co-ordinator:_ Paul Murphy<br>
_Editor:_ Roderick Jaynes<br>
_Associate Editor:_ Tricia Cooke<br>
_Production Designer:_ Rick Heinrichs<br>
_Art Director:_ Thomas P. Wilkins<br>
_Graphic Artist:_ Bradford Richardson<br>
_Set Decorator:_ Lauri Gaffin<br>
_Property Master:_ Dwight Benjamin-Creel<br>
_Construction Co-ordinator:_ Curtis W. Baruth<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Mary Zophres<br>
_Costume Supervisor:_ Sister Daniels<br>
_Key Make-up Artist:_ John Blake<br>
_Key Hairstylist:_ Daniel Curet<br>
_Titles Designer:_ Balsmeyer & Everett Inc<br>
_Opticals:_ John Alagna, Effects House<br>
_Music Composed/Orchestrated/Conducted by:_ Carter Burwell<br>
_Music Contractor:_ Emile Charlap<br>
_Music Editor:_ Todd Kassow<br>
_Associate Music Editor:_ Shari Schwartz<br>
_Music Scoring Mixer:_ Michael Farrow<br>
_Sound Mixer:_ Allan Byer<br>
_Boom Operators:_ Peter F. Kurland, Keenan Wyatt<br>
_Re-recording Mixers:_ Michael Barry, Skip Lievsay<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Skip Lievsay<br>
_Dialogue Editors:_ Magdaline Volaitis, Frederick Rosenberg<br>
_Negative Cutting:_ Nick DiBeneditto, N & D Film Service<br>
_Sound Effects Recordists:_ Ken Johnson, Ben Cheah<br>
_Sound Effects Editors:_ Eugene Gearty, Lewis Goldstein, Glenfield Payne<br>
_ADR Editor:_ Kenton Jakub<br>
_Foley Artist:_ Marko Costanzo<br>
_Foley Editors:_ Bruce Pross, Frank Kern, Steven Visscher<br>
_Foley Mixer:_ Ezra Dweck<br>
_Dolby Consultant:_ Bradford L. Hohle<br>
_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Jery Hewitt<br>
_Dialect Coach:_ Elizabeth Himmelstein<br>
_Unit Publicist:_ Joe Everett<br>

**Cast**<br>
Frances McDormand _(Marge Gunderson)_<br>
William H. Macy _(Jerry Lundegaard)_<br>
Steve Buscemi _(Carl Showalter)_<br>
Harve Presnell _(Wade Gustafson)_<br>
Peter Stormare _(Gaear Grimsrud)_<br>
Kristin Rudrüd _(Jean Lundegaard)_<br>
Tony Denman _(Scotty Lundegaard)_<br>
Gary Houston _(irate customer)_<br>
Sally Wingert _(irate customer’s wife)_<br>
Kurt Schweickhardt _(car salesman)_<br>
Larissa Kokernot _(hooker 1)_<br>
Melissa Peterman _(hooker 2)_<br>
Steven Reevis _(Shep Proudfoot)_<br>
Warren Keith _(Reilly Diefenbach)_<br>
Steve Edelman _(morning show host)_<br>
Sharon Anderson _(morning show hostess)_<br>
Larry Brandenburg _(Stan Grossman)_<br>
James Gaulke _(state trooper)_<br>
J. Todd Anderson _(man in snow)_<br>
Michelle Suzanne LeDoux _(victim in car)_<br>
John Carroll Lynch _(Norm Gunderson)_<br>
Bruce Bohne _(Lou)_<br>
Petra Boden _(cashier)_<br>
Steve Park _(Mike Yanagita)_<br>
Wayne Evenson _(customer)_<br>
Cliff Rakerd _(Officer Olson)_<br>
Jessica Shepherd _(hotel clerk)_<br>
Peter Schmitz _(airport lot attendant)_<br>
Steve Shaefer _(mechanic)_<br>
Michelle Hutchinson _(escort)_<br>
David Lomax _(man in hallway)_<br>
José Feliciano _(himself)_<br>
Don William Skahill _(night parking attendant)_<br>
Bain Boehlke _(Mr Mohra)_<br>
Rose Stockton _(Valerie)_<br>
Robert Ozasky _(1st Bismarck cop)_<br>
John Bandemer _(2nd Bismarck cop)_<br>
Bruce Campbell _(guy on TV soap)_ *<br>
Don Wescott _(bark beetle narrator)_<br>

USA/UK 1995©<br>
98 mins<br>
<br><br>

**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>

**Nomadland**<br>
From Mon 17 May
**First Cow**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**Surge**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**After Love**<br>
From Fri 4 Jun <br>
Sun 13 Jun 18:40 + Q&A with director Aleem Khan and actor Joanna Scanlan<br>
**Gunda**<br>
From Fri 4 Jun<br>
**Fargo**<br>
From Fri 11 Jun<br>
**The Reason I Jump**<br>
From Fri 18 Jun<br>
**Nashville**<br>
From Fri 25 Jun<br>
**Ultraviolence**<br>
From Sat 26 Jun<br>
Sat 26 June 14:20 + Q&A with director Ken Fero and contributor Janet Alder<br>
**Supernova**<br>
From Fri 2 Jul<br>
**Another Round**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Jumbo**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Deerskin**<br>
From Fri 16 Jul<br>
**Girlfriends**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
**Mandabi**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking atBFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
