---
layout: post
title: Ahimsa<br> Gandhi – The Power of the Powerless
published: true
date: 2021-06-20
readtime: true
categories: ['BAGRI FOUNDATION LONDON INDIAN FILM FESTIVAL']
tags: [Documentary, Biopic]
metadata: 'India/South Africa 2020, 108 mins<br> Director: Ramesh Sharma'
pdf: '2021-06-20-ahimsa-gandhi-the-power-of-the-powerless.pdf'
---

_+ Pre-recorded Q&A_

Featuring music by U2 and AR Rahman, this compelling and powerful documentary explores the roots and global impact of the Gandhian message of non-violence. Including interviews with renowned scholars and African American activists through to the Dalai Lama, and using rare archival footage from India, USA, Poland and Hungary, Ramesh Sharma’s film decodes the revolutionary power of non-violence and how it inspired movements of resistance across the world that still affect us today.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

‘If we could change ourselves, the tendencies in the world would also change.’<br>
**Mahatma Gandhi**

On 2nd October 2019, the world commemorated the 150th birthday anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. To mark this historic milestone, award winning and Emmy nominated filmmaker Ramesh Shama has directed a feature length documentary that profiles the lasting legacy of Ahimsa – _Gandhi: The Power of the Powerless_.

The Gandhian influence in some way still speaks to the conscience of the world as nations grapple with intractable problems; as societies struggle to give the marginalised and the underserved human dignity and restore fundamental human rights.

The film narrates the impact of the Gandhian message of non-violence worldwide; how it inspired Martin Luther King Jr and the civil rights movement in USA, the Solidarity movement in Poland, the velvet revolution of Havel, and the anti-apartheid strife in South Africa and Nelson Mandela’s fight against injustice, oppression, racism and his struggle to restore basic human rights and dignity for the Black citizens of his country. In short, the film decodes the power of non-violence and why it remains relevant to this day.

Interviews with world renowned scholars, biographers, as well as close family members of Mahatma Gandhi and Nobel Laureates such as HH The Dalai Lama, former Polish President Lech Walesa, iconic civil rights activists such as Congressman John Lewis and Rev James Lawson. This feature documentary weaves in rare archival footage, photographs and inspirational songs to put together a compelling and powerful narrative of the impact of Ahimsa – non-violence in some of the seminal political movements of the 20th century and its continuing relevance for contemporary times.

With a global arc as its canvas, the film underscores why Ahimsa remains the most powerful tool for conflict resolution. As Martin Luther King Jr says in the film, ‘The choice is no longer between violence and non-violence. It is between non-violence and non-existence.’<br>
**ahimsa-movie.com**
<br>

**Ahimsa  Gandhi: The Power of the Powerless**<br>
_Written and Directed by:_ Ramesh Sharma<br>
©:  Videovision Entertainment<br>
_Presented by:_ Engie<br>
_An_ Adline Entertainment _production_<br>
_In association with:_ First India Channel LLP, Videovision Entertainment, Distan Horizon<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Michela Scolari, Simmran Bedi, David Traub<br>
_Consulting Producer:_ Ahmed A. Jamal<br>
_Producers:_ Ramesh Sharma, Xavier Couture, Jean Luc Berlot, Anant Singh, Uma Gajapati Raju, Sanchaita Gajapati Raju<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Nithin Upadhye<br>
_Edited by:_ Yamini Upadhye<br>
_Music Composer:_ Debojyoti Mishra<br>

India/South Africa 2020<br>
108 mins
<br><br>

**BAGRI FOUNDATION LONDON INDIAN FILM FESTIVAL**<br>
**Ahimsa: Gandhi the Power of the Powerless**<br>
Sun 20 Jun 15:00<br>
**Searching for Happiness…**<br>
Tue 22 Jun 20:50<br>
**Nazarband Captive**<br>
Wed 23 Jun 20:45<br>
**A’hr Kayattam**<br>
Thu 24 Jun 18:00<br>
**The Salt in Our Waters Nonajoler Kabbo**<br>
Sun 27 Jun 15:00<br>
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking atBFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

