---
layout: post
title: The Tourist
published: true
date: 2021-12-07
readtime: true
categories: ['TV PREVIEW']
tags: [Thriller, Mystery]
metadata: 'UK/Australia 2021, 60 mins<br> Director: Chris Sweeney'
pdf: '2021-12-07-tourist.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with actors Jamie Dornan, Danielle Macdonald and Shalom  Brune-Franklin, writers/executive producers Harry & Jack Williams and  director Chris Sweeney._

From Emmy-winning and BAFTA nominated writer-producers Harry and Jack Williams (_Baptiste_, _The Missing_, _Liar_) comes this mystery-packed thriller. Jamie Dornan stars as a British man who finds himself in the glowing red heart of the Australian outback being pursued by a vast tank-truck trying to drive him off the road. An epic cat-and-mouse chase unfolds and he later wakes in hospital, hurt, but somehow alive. Except he has no idea who he is... Full of shocking, funny and brutal turns, _The Tourist_ is a story of self-discovery: as The Man starts to uncover the mystery of who he was, he’s also forced to ask who he is now, and fast – before those who are trying to kill him catch up with him.

_The Tourist_ will air on BBC One and BBC iPlayer from 1 January.

**About the panel**

**Jamie Dornan**  
Northern Ireland born actor Jamie Dornan has captured the attention of audiences and critics alike for his roles in both film and television.

Dornan is currently being lauded for his moving role in Kenneth Branagh’s semi-autobiographical critically acclaimed film, _Belfast_. In February, he surprised audiences with his comedic turn starring opposite Kristen Wiig and Annie Mumolo in Lionsgate’s comedy _Barb and Star Go to Vista del Mar_. In 2019, he starred in two films which premiered at the Toronto Film Festival. They were _Synchronic_, opposite Anthony Mackie, and Drake Doremus’ _Endings, Beginnings_ alongside Sebastian Stan and Shailene Woodley.

In 2018, Dornan starred opposite Peter Dinklage in Sacha Gervasi’s HBO Movie, _My Dinner with Herve_. Also in 2018, he received critical praise for his portrayal of Paul Conroy in Matthew Heineman’s Marie Colvin biopic, _A Private War_. In 2016, Dornan starred in _Anthropoid_, alongside Cillian Murphy. In 2015, 2017 and 2018 he starred along with Dakota Johnson in the _Fifty Shades_ trilogy, based on the novels written by author E.L. James. The films, directed by Sam Taylor-Johnson and later James Foley, earned over $1.45 billion at the worldwide box-office.

On the television front, Dornan received critical acclaim for his portrayal of a serial killer in the BBC’s crime drama _The Fall_, opposite Gillian Anderson.  In 2013, the series launch was the highest rated drama for the channel in 8 years. Jamie’s role earned him a TV BAFTA nomination for Best Actor and two IFTA wins for Best Lead Actor and Rising Star in 2014. He also won the Breakthrough Award at the 2014 Broadcasting Press Guild Awards for his performance and the drama received a nomination for Best Drama at the National Television Awards.

His feature debut was in Sofia Coppola’s 2006 Oscar®-winning historic epic, _Marie Antoinette_ in which  he took the role of Count Axel Fersen, the lover to Kirstin Dunst’s  eponymous  Marie Antoinette. In 2009, he starred in the British independent film _Shadows in the Sun,_ with Jean Simmons and James Wilby.

**Danielle Macdonald**  
Danielle Macdonald was born and raised in Sydney, Australia. Audiences know Danielle for her breakout role as ‘Patti’ in Fox Searchlight’s _Patti Cake$_ as well as the title character opposite Jennifer Aniston in _Dumplin’_. Additional credits include Netflix’s runaway hit, _Bird Box_, Sony Pictures Classics’ film _French Exit_, Fox Searchlight’s Oscar-winning short film, _Skin_, and she appeared in the feature version of A24’s _Skin_, with Jamie Bell. She starred in Netflix’s _Unbelievable_ which has garnered critical acclaim and a Golden Globe nomination for _Best Television Limited Series_ as well as an Emmy Award nomination for _Outstanding Limited Series_. The Savannah Film Festival honoured her in 2019 where she received the _Rising Star Award._ Macdonald can currently be seen in the romantic comedy _Falling for Figaro_.

**Shalom Brune-Franklin**  
Shalom Brune-Franklin is a young British/Australian actress who first came to the attention of the industry after training at the prestigious Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts, where she won the Chris Edmund Performing Arts Scholarship created by Hugh Jackman’s foundation. The scholarship was set up to award the most-outstanding performer at the academy each year. She was also named one of the Casting Guild of Australia’s 10 Rising Stars as well as being a finalist, twice, for the Heath Ledger Scholarship.

In 2021 Shalom was seen in the newly introduced role of Chloe in the much anticipated sixth series of the BBC’s _Line of Duty_. She was also seen in _Roadkill_ opposite Hugh Laurie and Helen McCrory. In 2020 Shalom starred in big-budget Netflix series _Cursed_.  In 2017 Shalom joined the cast of hugely popular BBC One series _Our Girl_ as new private, ‘Maisie Richards’ opposite Michelle Keegan. She also starred in Peter Kominsky’s Channel 4 series _The State_. In Australia, Shalom starred in two Channel Nine TV shows, _Doctor Doctor_ and _Bad Mothers_.

**Harry and Jack Williams (Creators/Writers/Executive Producers)**  
Emmy-winning and BAFTA nominated writer-producer duo Harry and Jack Williams set up their independent production company Two Brothers Pictures in 2014, and have since produced shows for Amazon, HBO, AMC, BBC, ITV and Sky. At the core of the slate is Harry and Jack’s writing partnership, which has boasted BBC1’s Golden Globe and Emmy-nominated drama, _The Missing_, the hugely successful ITV thriller, _Liar_ (S1&2), and impressive international dramas such as _The Widow_, starring Kate Beckinsale for ITV and Amazon. Alongside this, they have nurtured new writing talent, executive producing Emmy & Golden Globe winning series, _Fleabag_, and the International Emmy nominated show, _Back to Life_. Two Brothers Pictures have had an impressive year of releases, with Jack and Harry’s beloved series _Baptiste_ returning for a second series, as well as their nail-biting psychological thriller, _Angela Black_, and the second series of _Back to Life_ also airing earlier this year.

**Chris Sweeney (Director)**  
Chris Sweeney is a director, producer, writer & podcaster. He recently directed series one of the Emmy-nominated BBC / Showtime series _Back to Life_ and has just released season 6 of his award-winning podcast _Homo Sapiens_, known as the LGBTQ+ answer to BBC Radio 4’s _Woman’s Hour_. He is also a seasoned music video director working with artists including Lana Del Rey, Foals and Lily Allen.
<br><br>

**THE TOURIST (episode 1)**<br>
_Directed by:_ Chris Sweeney<br>
_Written & Created by:_ Harry Williams, Jack Williams<br>
©: The Tourist Productions Limited<br>
_Production Company:_ Two Brothers Pictures<br>
_In association with:_ Highview Productions<br>
_Producer:_ Lisa Scott<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Harry Williams, Jack Williams, Christopher Aird, Chris Sweeney<br>
_Executive Producer for BBC:_ Tommy Bulfin<br>
_Assistant Producer:_ Catriona Renton<br>
_Co-producer:_ Emma Pike<br>
_Line Producer:_ Jacqueline King<br>
_Post-production Supervisor:_ Portia Napier<br>
_Production Executive:_ Andrew Benson<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Mark Kraus<br>
_2nd Unit Director:_ Kimble Rendall<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ Travis Kalendra<br>
_UK Casting Director:_ Gary Davy<br>
_Australian Casting Directors:_ Ann Fay,  Leigh Pickford<br>
_Supervising Location Manager:_ Sarah Abbey<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Ben Wheeler<br>
_Editor:_ Emma Oxley<br>
_Production Designer:_ Scott Bird<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Wendy Cork<br>
_Make-up & Hair Designer:_ Fiona Rees-Jones<br>
_Composer:_ Dominik Scherrer<br>
_Sound Recordist:_ Des Kenneally<br>

**Cast**<br>
Jamie Dornan<br>
Danielle Macdonald<br>
Shalom Brune-Franklin<br>
Ólafur Darri Ólafsson<br>
Genevieve Lemon<br>
Danny Adcock<br>

UK/Australia 2021<br>
60 mins<br>
<br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Exclusive Preview: Swan Song + pre-recorded Q&A with director Benjamin Cleary, producer Rebecca Bourke and actors Mahershala Ali and Naomie Harris**<br>
Wed 8 Dec 17:15<br>
**Preview: Boiling Point + Q&A with director Philip Barantini and actors Ray Panthaki, Lauryn Ajufo and Alice Feetham**<br>
Wed 8 Dec 20:30<br>
**TV Preview: Ghosts Christmas Special + Q&A (guests TBA)**<br>
Thu 9 Dec 18:10<br>
**tick, tick… BOOM! + (TBC) pre-recorded Q&A with director Lin-Manuel Miranda, actors Alexandra Shipp and Robin de Jesús and producer Julie Oh**<br>
Thu 9 Dec 20:30<br>
**Patti Boulaye**<br>
Sun 12 Dec 15:30<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera: Bridget Jones’s Diary at 20 + Q&A with director Sharon Maguire**<br>
Thu 16 Dec 18:00<br>
**Preview: Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy (Guzen to sozo)**<br>
Wed 29 Dec 18:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTMyMDU4MzM4MF19
-->
