---
layout: post
title: In the Cut
published: true
date: 2021-10-31
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama, Thriller]
metadata: 'USA 2003, 119 mins<br> Director: Jane Campion'
pdf: '2021-10-31-in-the-cut.pdf'
---

In one of _In the Cut_’s early scenes, English professor Frannie is teaching her students about Virginia Woolf’s _To the Lighthouse_. They look bored, apathetic. One complains that all that happens in the book is ‘some old lady dies’. Frannie asks how many women have to die to make it interesting. ‘At least three,’ comes the reply. A sensuous study of desire and masochism wrapped around a straight-up thriller (or perhaps vice-versa), _In the Cut_ gives us three murdered women to keep these students interested while director Jane Campion attends to more troubling preoccupations. The result is one of her most provocative and complex films yet.

Largely faithful to Susanna Moore’s compelling if slightly airless novel, _In the Cut_ plays out like _Bluebeard_ meets _Sea of Love_ for the _Sex and the City_ generation. Meg Ryan’s Frannie and her half-sister Pauline are urban singletons, almost burnt out with bad relationships. Pauline, who lives above a friendly strip bar, has started specialising in safely unavailable married men while Frannie is practically celibate. Their distrust of men seems to have set in early due to a caddish father, seen courting Frannie’s mother on a frozen lake in an oneiric flashback in which his skates score lines of blood into the ice and later amputate her mother’s legs, surreal touches reminiscent of the fantasy sequences in Campion’s _The Portrait of a Lady_.

Nearly every man here has the potential to transmute into a killer, from Frannie’s student Cornelius with his John Wayne Gacy obsession, to her ex John Graham, an actor training to be a doctor and therefore familiar enough with anatomy to ‘disarticulate’ (an apt word in a film preoccupied with language) women’s limbs. Even Frannie’s love interest, the elusive Detective Malloy who promises Frannie he can be ‘whoever [she] wants him to be’, shows a disturbing side while joking with his partner Rodriguez (who himself tried to kill his wife). They josh that all men need from a woman is a ‘hole, tits and a heartbeat’. Upping the misogynist ante, Malloy observes, ‘You don’t even need the tits.’ Rodriguez goes one further: ‘Or the heartbeat.’

What makes the film so provocative is that the more things point to Malloy being the killer, the more Frannie is drawn to him, turned on not just by his cunnilingus technique but also by his potentially lethal power. A woman of few, choice words, attracted to a man with a gift for spiel and animal magnetism, Frannie’s relationship with Malloy recalls the sexual chemistry between Holly Hunter’s mute, cerebral Ada and Harvey Keitel’s gone-native Baines in _The Piano_. The sex scenes are especially pungent, scored with a kind of electronic keening on the soundtrack, and marked by a fetid grubbiness in the set design. The outstanding use of New York locations emphasises the sweltering atmosphere: scenes are observed as if through a heat haze of desire. The work of cinematographer Dion Beebe (_Holy Smoke_) is nothing less than extraordinary. Particularly innovative is the use of the travelling focal point that defocuses most of an image apart from one key detail in the frame, suggesting a sort of ecstatic subjectivity, a correlative of the ‘bitch vision’ Cornelius boasts of mastering in his prose. The poetic look of the movie interlocks nicely with its literary sensibility. Frannie’s eye is often drawn to the poems posted on the subway, which comment obliquely on the action.

As finely wrought as _In the Cut_ is, one could argue that it fails as a genre exercise. Experienced thriller fans will guess the killer quicker than it takes to recite an Emily Dickinson poem. But once the mystery’s burned away, what’s left is a minutely etched study in mood and female psychology.<br>
**Leslie Felperin, _Sight & Sound_, November 2003**<br>

**Jane Campion on ‘In the Cut’**<br>
In the cut, _much like_ The Piano _and_ The Portrait of a Lady, _deals with female masochism._

I think I relate to emotional masochism rather than physical because I hate to hurt myself or to see someone else hurting themselves. Susanna Moore’s book is quite nihilistic and deals directly with female self-sacrifice – even when she’s dying (which she does in the book), the lead character Frannie is imagining how her male killer would see her, wondering if he’d notice she’d scratched him and his flesh is under her fingernails. In our culture male ideas so dominate our psyches we tend to think of ourselves through a male screen. It’s inherent in the myths of romance and love we live with – if you haven’t got a man loving you or you’re not in a relationship it’s as if you’re not alive, as if what happens to you has no value.

_You seem to be developing a riposte to existing gender mythologies._

I enjoyed making this film because I got the opportunity to read a lot of poems and to think about love, romance and sex and how they’ve infested people’s psyches. And it’s not often you see sex on screen that’s designed to be pleasurable for the woman.

_Meg Ryan reinvents herself as an actress to play Frannie, much as Nicole Kidman did in_ The Portrait of a Lady. _Is it important for you to find new aspects to your actors?_

I think Nicole had got stuck in a string of bad Hollywood movies that were depressing her, and Meg felt the same. She’d started getting acting coaching and a coach called Sandra Secat called me and said I should audition her. I hadn’t thought of her, but she’s an amazingly emotional actress.

_She has referred to_ Klute _as an inspiration for her acting style, but there’s also an aspect of Nicole Kidman there. Was that deliberate?_

They look similar, but we didn’t try to make her look like Nicole. We did think of Jane Fonda in _Klute_ and also of Antonioni’s styling in _Blowup_. I looked at Coppola’s _The Rain People_ as well for its _vérité_ style and at _The Godfather_ for the acting style.

_You’ve combined a naturalistic acting style with rich textures in the cinematography._

It’s an observing camera most of the time. I did storyboard it, but tended to throw them away and find the scene as we were doing it. And we were very influenced by the locations.

_The film couldn’t be set anywhere but New York._

New York is a magnet for hopes and dreams, as well as a port where people who once had those dreams still hang around. I think of Pauline as a veteran of too many sexual adventures. She isn’t dismal, though – she has problems but she’s intelligent about them.

_The city is very eroticised in the film._

Much of the eroticism comes from the locations dictated by the story. Pauline lives above a strip joint, and the one we used actually exists. We knocked on the door of the flat above it and there were students living there. The red lighthouse is clearly a phallic symbol, but with all these images I tried not to oversweat them. What I focused on was getting the detective story working well in the hope everything else would take care of itself.<br>
**Jane Campion interviewed by Lizzie Francke, _Sight & Sound_, November 2003**<br>

**IN THE CUT**<br>
_Directed by_: Jane Campion  
_©_: Pathé Productions Ltd.  
_Production Companies_: Screen Gems, Red Turtle  
_Executive Producers_: François Ivernel, Effie T. Brown  
_Producers_: Laurie Parker, Nicole Kidman  
_Associate Producer_: Ray Angelic  
_Pathé Head of Physical Production_: Susanna Wyatt  
_Production Manager_: Christopher Goode  
_Production Co-ordinators_: M.J. Magbanua, Lara Ford  
_Production Accountant_: Sean Hogan  
_Location Managers_: Gayle Vangrofsky, Chris Marsh  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Gordon MacPhail  
_2nd Unit Director_: Laurie Parker  
_1st Assistant Director_: Timothy Bird  
_Script Supervisor_: Mary Cybulski  
_Casting_: Billy Hopkins, Mark Bennett, Suzanne Smith, Kerry Barden  
_Screenplay_: Jane Campion, Susanna Moore  
_Additional Screenwriting_: Stavros Kazantzidis  
_Based on the novel by_: Susanna Moore  
_Script Consultant_: Stavros Kazantzidis  
_Director of Photography_: Dion Beebe  
_2nd Unit Director of Photography_: Nils Benson  
_Camera Operator/2nd Unit Operator_: Nils Benson  
_Visual Effects_: Animal Logic, Andrew Brown  
_Special Effects Co-ordinator_: Drew Jiritano  
_Graphics Design_: Nils Benson  
_Edited by_: Alexandre de Franceschi  
_Production Design by_: David Brisbin  
_Art Director_: David Stein  
_Set Decorator_: Andrew Baseman  
_Property Master_: Dan Boxer  
_Costume Designer_: Beatrix Aruna Pasztor  
_Wardrobe Supervisors_: Laura Downing, Robert Tesar  
_Make-up Designers_: Noriko Watanabe, Neal Martz  
_Special Effects Make-up_: Neal Martz  
_Key Hair Stylist_: Lori Guidroz  
_Title Design_: Andrew Brown  
_Main Titles_: Animal Logic  
_Digital Optical Effects_: Atlab, Anthos Simon  
_Music Composed by_: Hilmar Örn Hilmarsson  
_Conductor_: Árni Hardarson  
_Sound Designer_: Peter Miller  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Ken Ishii  
_Boom Operator_: Schavaria Reeves  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Martin Oswin  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Andrew Plain  
_Dialogue Editors_: Linda Murdoch, Nicholas Breslin  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Julius Le Flore  
_Creative Consultants_: M.J. Robinson, Joshua Green, Anthony Vasquez, Detective Michael De Lorenzo, Detective Hal Sherman, Detective Craig Weinberg, Detective Arthur Nascarella, Susan Batson, Carl Ford, Roberta Wallach, Penny Allen, Sandra Seacat, Jorge Muniz, Louis Brown, Antonio Ferrera  
_‘Thank you fabulous Kevin Bacon!!!’_  
_Thanks to_: ‘Mayor’ Harvey Keitel  
_Dedicated to_: Alice Allegra Englert  
_Animal Wrangler_: Steve McAuliff, Animal Actors Inc  
_Unit Publicist_: Robert Levine<br>

**Cast**<br>
Meg Ryan _(Frannie)_  
Mark Ruffalo _(Detective Malloy)_  
Jennifer Jason Leigh _(Pauline)_  
Nick Damici _(Detective Rodriguez)_  
Sharrieff Pugh _(Cornelius Webb)_  
Michael Nuccio _(Frannie’s young father)_  
Alison Nega _(young father’s fiancée)_  
Dominick Aries _(attentive husband)_  
Susan Gardner _(perfect wife)_  
Heather Litteer _(Angela Sands)_  
Daniel T. Booth _(Red Turtle bartender)_  
Yaani King, Frank Harts, Sebastian Sozzi,  
Zach Wegner _(Frannie’s students)_  
Patrice O’Neal _(Hector, Baby Doll bouncer)_  
Funda Duyal, Theo Kogan _(Baby Doll bartenders)_  
Sandy Vital, Sharon Riggins, Karen Riggins,  
Nancy La Scala, Ami Goodheart _(Baby Doll dancers)_  
Upendran Paniker _(taxi driver)_  
Kendra Zimmerman _(café waitress)_  
Michelle Hurst _(teacher at Frannie’s school)_  
Sunrise Coiley _(Frannie’s young mother)_  
Hal Sherman _(forensic detective)_  
Dana Lubotsky _(laundry room murder witness)_  
Jacinto Taras Riddick _(detective in precinct)_  
Arthur Nascarella _(Captain Crosley)_  
James Firo _(Detective Halloran)_  
Cordell Clyde _(informer)_  
Tim House _(Baby Doll bar customer)_  
Julius Le Flore _(cursing motorist)_  
Vinny Vella Sr _(concerned bystander)_  
Kevin Bacon _(John Graham)_ *<br>

USA 2003<br>
119 mins<br>

\* Uncredited
<br>

**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**In the Cut**<br>
Sun 31 Oct 18:30; Tue 30 Nov 18:10<br>
**No Country for Old Men**<br>
Mon 1 Nov 20:30; Wed 24 Nov 18:00 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large)<br>
**Blue Velvet**<br>
Tue 2 Nov 18:00; Sat 13 Nov 20:45;
Sun 21 Nov 17:40<br>
**The Silence of the Lambs**<br>
Wed 3 Nov 19:00 (+ pre-recorded intro by Professor Yvonne Tasker, author of BFI Film Classics _The Silence of the Lambs_); Thu 18 Nov 14:40<br>
**House of Bamboo**<br>
Thu 4 Nov 20:50; Thu 11 Nov 14:30;  
Mon 15 Nov 18:10<br>
**Kiss Me Deadly**<br>
Fri 5 Nov 20:40; Sat 20 Nov 18:00;  
Sat 28 Nov 12:15<br>
**Zero Dark Thirty**<br>
Sat 6 Nov 17:30; Tue 9 Nov 14:15;  
Sun 28 Nov 15:20<br>
**Murder on the Orient Express**<br>
Sun 7 Nov 18:10; Tue 16 Nov 14:15<br>
**Inside Man**<br>
Mon 8 Nov 20:30; Thu 25 Nov 14:30;  
Tue 30 Nov 20:20<br>
**The Long Goodbye**<br>
Wed 10 Nov 17:50 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large); Sat 27 Nov 20:40<br>
**Shaft**<br>
Fri 12 Nov 20:50; Tue 23 Nov 18:20<br>
**Heat**<br>
Sat 13 Nov 16:30; Mon 15 Nov 13:40<br>
**Dirty Harry**<br>
Sun 14 Nov 18:20; Fri 26 Nov 20:45<br>
**Devil in a Blue Dress**<br>
Wed 17 Nov 18:00 (+ intro by _Empire Magazine_ Contributing Editor Amon Warmann)<br>
**Illustrious Corpses (Cadaveri eccellenti)**<br>
Fri 19 Nov 20:40; Sat 27 Nov 18:10<br>
**Chinatown**<br>
Sat 20 Nov 20:30<br>
**The Manchurian Candidate**<br>
Sun 21 Nov 14:50<br>
**Un Flic**<br>
Tue 23 Nov 20:45;Mon 29 Nov 20:55<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
