---
layout: post
title: Deerskin (Le Daim)
published: true
date: 2021-07-16
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Comedy, Horror]
metadata: 'France/Belgium/Switzerland, 2019, 77 mins<br> Director: Quentin Dupieux'
pdf: '2021-07-16-deerskin.pdf'
---

_Deerskin_ is the story of a man morbidly – and murderously – fixated on a second-hand tasselled jacket. So what is Quentin Dupieux’s film really about? Delusional narcissism? Obsessional fetishism? Psychic breakdown, or male midlife crisis taken to outlandish extremes? Is it – since the jacket appears to take on its own baleful personality – a tale of quasi-demonic possession?  Or perhaps – to quote barmaid Denise, referring to the movie that she thinks phoney director Georges is trying to shoot – the real subject of the film is ‘(the) jacket – or rather, the fact that we all hide behind a shell to protect ourselves from the real world.’

Denise here pre-empts, and effectively short-circuits, any interpretations on the part of viewers and critics – which is characteristic of the knowing irony of writer-director Dupieux, once known as hit-making techno artist Mr Oizo. Dupieux specialises in facetiously outré comedies, but while _Deerskin_ continues in that vein, it arguably shows him becoming a touch more respectable as an art/cult crossover auteur. While his earlier films, some made in the US, were often critically dismissed as mere pop-conceptual provocations (_Steak_, 2007, a vehicle for French duo Eric and Ramzy; _Rubber_, 2010), Dupieux is now a legitimate festival fixture, casting art-cinema regulars such as Adèle Haenel here and Adèle Exarchopoulos in last year’s follow-up _Mandibles_. At the risk of calling them one-joke comedies, he often builds his films on high-concept premises, systematically unpacked to develop their absurdity: in _Rubber_ a homicidal tyre, in _Mandibles_ a giant fly.

While _Deerskin_ can certainly be categorised as a black comedy, its effect is a delicate matter of register, with a measured pace and downbeat tone making the most of the narrative’s caustic, desolate edge. Shot and edited, as ever, by Dupieux himself, the film opens in a glumly desaturated palette, seemingly reflecting Georges’s depressive state. But once the deerskin jacket is produced, its colour suffuses the film entirely. An equally faded, but strikingly varied range of browns – wood, suede, caramel – suggests that the jacket has recast the world in its image. It also evokes a flavour of the Old West, giving Denise’s bar a touch of Tombstone saloon – just as the French Pyrenees here stand in for the wilds of Wyoming or Montana.

The ambivalence also comes from the casting. Denise is played by Haenel, who – although she has appeared in comedies – is best known for radiating earnest intensity for the likes of Céline Sciamma, Robin Campillo and the Dardennes. Here she plays the (ostensibly) sane and considerably smarter half of an unlikely duo, her calmly naturalistic performance, and Denise’s sceptical responses to Georges’s derangement, representing a baseline of reality beneath the film’s craziness. By contrast, Georges is played by Jean Dujardin; he has used his anachronistic matinee idol looks to engagingly incongruous comic effect, notably in _The Artist_ (2011), but has increasingly turned to serious roles (e.g., Polanski’s _An Officer and a Spy_, 2019). _Deerskin_ derives a tremor of uncertainty from his double-edged performance: at once a portrayal of a clueless buffoon and a troubling evocation of a man in pathological denial about his desperate plight, his madness causing him to lose in rapid succession his marriage, his money, his mobile phone and his sense of self. What makes Georges’s situation so comically excruciating is the ludicrous nature of his fixation: a tasselled jacket of the sort once routinely worn in westerns and briefly fashionable among 1960s West Coast rockers (not to mention Charles Manson, as seen in Mary Harron’s 2018 film _Charlie Says_). The jacket may also have supernaturally malign powers, like the red dress in Peter Strickland’s _In Fabric_ (2018); but then, its autonomous-seeming presence might just be an exteriorisation of Georges’s disturbance, which begins with deluded narcissism and develops from there (admiring himself in the mirror, he approvingly mutters ‘Killer style,’ as the subtitle puts it; the original French, no less appropriately, is _style de malade_, ‘sicko style’).  Either way, a perverse erotic dynamism is at work when Georges converses with the garment, at first half-heartedly ventriloquising a shy female voice, then giving it a more macho personality that soon takes over as boss.

It’s only occasionally that Dupieux spikes the deadpan tone with outright bursts of farce, as when Georges tries ineptly to stuff his old corduroy jacket down a toilet. Much of the film plays on the comedy of misunderstanding: a woman Georges meets in the bar offers to appear in his porn film because, surely, someone who dresses like him can only be that sort of director. And when it comes to comic grand guignol, Dupieux gives us some very discreet bursts of gore in the murder montages. Not the least disturbing aspect of the film’s humour is that _Deerskin_ depicts a world in which no one seems very bothered by death: Georges’s several murders seem to go unnoticed in this small mountain community, while a hotel clerk is blasé about the fact that his predecessor has just blown his brains out (as shown with graphic matter-of-factness in a scene in which Georges is oblivious to the carnage, because he is only interested in the deceased’s suede hat). This insouciance carries through in the incidental music, sampled from a range of 60s and 70s sources, including Morton Stevens’s _Hawaii Five-O_ theme (snarling horns) and David Axelrod (incongruously breezy jazz guitar).

_Deerskin_ is very much a meta-filmic affair. In a nicely rivalrous jab from one Quentin at another, amateur editor Denise talks about her hobby of recutting existing films, for example rearranging _Pulp Fiction_ in chronological order (the result, she says, ‘sucked’). As a faux filmmaker, Georges at first points his DV camera at anything he fancies (not least his suede-covered self), generating footage that Denise, in the absence of a script, interprets as the material for a mockumentary. But, given that she is so much smarter than this clueless poseur, is she really fooled by his clumsy grifting and tall tales about producers who are incommunicado in Siberia? Or rather, does she – as she eventually declares – see through him from the start? If so, that would make her not only Georges’s enabler, but a kindred spirit, every bit as dangerous but altogether more lucid. We can speculate on all this, but just when _Deerskin_ has worked up a disturbing resonance as a fable of murderous complicity, suddenly – after a brisk 75 minutes – a magnificently derisory punchline turns the whole thing into a nonchalant shaggy dog story. If that isn’t killer style, what is?  
**Jonathan Romney, _Sight & Sound_, Summer 2021**
<br><br>

**DEERSKIN (LE DAIM)**  
_Directed by_: Quentin Dupieux  
©: Atelier de Production, Arte France Cinéma, Nexus Factory, Umedia  
_In co-production with_: Arte France Cinéma,  Nexus Factory, Umedia  
_In association with_: uFund  
_In co-production with_: Garidi Films  
_In association with_: WTFilms, Cinémage 13  
_With the support of_: Région Nouvelle-Aquitaine  
_In partnership with_: CNC  
_With the participation of_: Centre National de la Cinématographie, Canal+, OCS, Arte France  
_Presented by_: Atelier de Production  
_Supported by the_: Tax Shelter of the federal government of Belgium and the Tax Shelter investors  
_International Sales_: WTFilms  
_Produced by_: Thomas Verhaeghe,  Mathieu Verhaeghe  
_Co-produced by_: Jamal Zeinal-Zade,  Sylvain Goldberg, Nadia Khamlichi, Cédric Iland, Dimitri Stephanides, Grégory Chambet  
_Associate Producer_: Jamal Zeinal-Zade  
_Production Manager_: Arnaud Tournaire  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Abraham Goldblat  
_1st Assistant Director_: Catherine Olaya  
_Casting_: Marine Albert  
_Child Casting_: Ophélie Gelber  
_Casting (Aquitaine)_: Laurent Nogueira  
_Written by_: Quentin Dupieux  
_Director of Photography_: Quentin Dupieux  
_A Camera Operator_: Quentin Dupieux  
_Digital Visual Effects_:  Compagnie Générale des Effets Visuels, Benuts  
_Special Effects_: Olivier Afonso  
_Editing_: Quentin Dupieux  
_Sets and Art Direction_: Joan Le Boru  
_Set Decorator_: Joan Le Boru  
_Costumes_: Isabelle Pannetier  
_Key Make-up_: Sophie Benaïche  
_Special Make-up Effects_: Olivier Afonso  
_Key Hair Stylist_: Jane Brizard  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Guillaume Le Braz  
_1st Sound Assistant_: Régis Boussin  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Alexis Place  
_Foley Artist_: Gadou Naudin  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Cyril Holtz  
_Dialogue Editor_: Charles Deville  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Philippe Guégan  
_Unit Publicist_: Monica Donatti

**Cast**  
Jean Dujardin _(Georges)_  
Adèle Haenel _(Denise)_  
Albert Delpy _(Monsieur B.)_  
Coralie Russier _(neighbour)_  
Laurent Nicolas _(receptionist)_  
Marie Bunel _(bar patron)_  
Pierre Gommé _(child)_  
Caroline Piette _(banker)_  
Stéphane Jobert _(technician)_  
Géraldine Schitter _(shoe seller)_  
Panayotis Pascot _(Johnny)_  
Youssef Hajdi _(Olaf)_  
Simon Thomas _(Xavier)_  
Tom Hudson _(Yann)_  
Maryne Cayon _(Zita)_  
Thomas Blanchard _(man in jacket)_  
Rio Vega _(victim 1)_  
Maxim Driesen _(victim 2)_  
Jérôme Menard _(restaurant waiter)_  
David Sztanke _(victim 3)_  
Julia Faure _(victim 4)_  
Franck Lebreton _(man driving digger)_  
Ayouba Ali _(gloves seller)_  
Bruno Mary _(hunter)_

France/Belgium/Switzerland 2019©  
77 mins

A Picturehouse Entertainment release
<br><br>


**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Another Round**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Jumbo**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Tove**<br>
From Fri 9 Jul<br>
**Deerskin**<br>
From Fri 16 Jul<br>
**Girlfriends**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
**Mandabi**<br>
From Fri 23 Jul<br>
**Limbo**<br>
From Fri 30 Jul<br>
**The Most Beautiful Boy in the World**<br>
From Fri 30 Jul<br>
**Now, Voyager**<br>
From Fri 6 Aug<br>
**The Story of a Three Day Pass (La Permission)**<br>
From Sat 7 Aug<br>
**Censor**<br>
From Fri 20 Aug<br>
**Souad**<br>
From Fri 27 Aug
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTA2NzQ5MTc0Nl19
-->
