---
layout: post
title: Ammonite
published: true
date: 2021-05-17 14:10:00
readtime: true
categories: ['New Releases']
tags: [Biopic]
---
**Ammonite, Australia, UK, USA, 2020, 120 mins**<br><br>
**[NEW RELEASES](https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=releases&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=)**

Francis Lee’s follow-up to his first film, God’s Own Country (2017), is a story similarly entrenched in the wild beauty and weather-beaten roughness of British landscape, where the interpersonal hardness reflects a tough environment and economic scarcity. The first sound to hit the senses is of hard graft: the film reveals a woman on her knees, scrubbing tiles, over which a procession of gentlemen trample as they rush to admire the British Museum’s latest acquisition – one of Mary Anning’s ‘sea lizards’.  

Like Lee’s debut, Ammonite is fiercely sensorial. Johnnie Burn’s sound design wraps the protagonists’ world in the unrelenting coastal winds and crashing white water that drags through the shore’s shingle. The thick slippery clay of Lyme Regis’s cliffs replaces the mud of the Yorkshire Dales, but the blood, urine and spit continue to flow. This time around, though, the shit is fossilised, as protagonist Mary Anning bluntly informs hopeful novice fossil-hunter Mr Murchison.  

Kate Winslet serves up dour-faced, cold pragmatism in her role as the renowned palaeontologist and fossil-collector Mary Anning. Ammonite imagines a romance for a woman whose love life remains a mystery. When Mr Murchison heads abroad, leaving his fragile wife Charlotte to heal from an ambiguous trauma, Mary grudgingly agrees to let her trail along on her beach excursions: ‘Looks to be fuck-all wrong with you to me,’ she mutters to herself.  

God’s Own Country co-star Alec Secareanu returns as Dr Lieberson, a new medic in town, who develops feelings for Mary and, as in that earlier role, is met with suspicion. Lee taps into the barbed mistrust that characterises small-town life, surfacing in the wide-eyed horror of Mary’s mother Molly as she detects the unmistakable lilt of an overseas accent.  

Gemma Jones – another actor from God’s Own Country – repeats her role as a reticent, grumpy mother figure who has led a hard life. Again, she watches her child with silent disapproval – initially, the wordless nature of Mary and Molly’s relationship leaves it unclear who this cohabiting character is. The lack of warmth and intimacy is palpable. ‘Mary!’ she shrieks from another room in the house, demanding her daughter’s undivided attention, and evoking the co-dependent bond of the two Edie Beales in the 1975 documentary Grey Gardens.  

The Annings’ reticence suggests the guardedness that comes with a hard life. Mary’s family is working-class, her mother sickly, her father dead. The economic burden is on Mary’s shoulders, and on top of that she’s not welcomed into their boys’ club by geologists who can afford to indulge as a hobby what for her is a livelihood. Mary builds up Charlotte’s confidence, in a world where men automatically make decisions for her.  

Saoirse Ronan’s Charlotte is pallid and timid and, with her manners and finery, from a different world. Yet in turn they bring each other out of their shells, a risk perhaps communicated with strongest clarity in Stephane Fontaine’s poetic cinematography: a magpie on the damp grey promenade, holding a snail shell in its beak. Like ammonites, the spiral symbolises life; this shell is a bit broken but has been seen in a different light, a thing of value to another living creature.  

**Sophie Brown, Sight & Sound, April 2021** 

Palaeontologists have tended to be imagined by filmmakers as action heroes (Sam Neill in Jurassic Park) or stuffy scientists offered up for laughs (Cary Grant in Bringing Up Baby, Ross from Friends). Francis Lee’s remarkable new film Ammonite excavates a very different fossil hunter: Mary Anning, a real-life 19th-century palaeontologist, played here, often covered in mud, by Kate Winslet. The second feature from the director of God’s Own Country (2017) bears many similarities with his striking debut: it’s an intimate character study about a solitary, withdrawn figure embarking on a tender romance, told with meticulous attention to realism.
Winslet has played many headstrong characters in the past but none as gruff, wary and introverted as she makes Anning. Saoirse Ronan’s Charlotte Murchison, a sickly upper-class woman abandoned by her husband to Anning’s care in Lyme Regis, tempts Anning out of her shell and is herself transformed in the process. The chemistry between the pair as their tentative relationship flourishes is a joy to watch. Winslet’s Anning, Lee tells me on the phone from his remote home in rural Yorkshire, is much like the mollusc of the film’s title: ‘They both have a hard shell around themselves to protect their very vulnerable centre.’  

After God’s Own Country, which touched on raw Brexit-era issues in the UK, such as immigration, Lee had no intentions of delving into the UK’s past. ‘I never thought I would make a period film,’ he admits. ‘There’s a set way in which period films are made, particularly British period films: the Austen and Forster adaptations, or the Merchant Ivory films. Although I enjoy them, they wouldn’t be films I would ever make because they’re about representing the past in a very glossy way. Often period films are not about the ordinary person’s experience in that period, they’re about the upper classes or the middle classes… That’s not really my vibe.’  

Lee had never heard of Anning but stumbled across her online when he was researching rocks to buy as a present for his ex-boyfriend. ‘Instantly, she struck a chord with me. She was born into poverty and, despite having no education, no privilege in her life whatsoever, she rose to be the leading expert in her field throughout her lifetime – but was ignored by a totally patriarchal, class-ridden society. Mary primarily did it to earn money, to put food on the table, to survive. And I’m really drawn to survivors.  

‘I was also drawn to her because there was virtually nothing written about her by contemporaries beyond her discoveries; there’s nothing about her personal life. I found two descriptions of her by contemporaries. One described her as lovely and warm and [that she] liked children. And the other one described her as a grumpy, difficult woman whose shop was dirty. And that was it.’  

Anning was unconventional in other intriguing ways too. ‘There is no evidence whatsoever that she ever had a relationship with a man,’ Lee says. ‘But there is evidence she had close friendships with women.’  

He points to research about women and female same-sex relationships in the 18th and 19th centuries. ‘There was so much evidence of letters written by women to other women about deep, passionate loving relationships that were totally underground. At the time, society believed women had no sexual pleasure organs so the idea of two women being together was just not even thought about.’  

Lee felt it important to cast an English actor in her forties, both to reflect Anning’s age accurately at the time the events are set and to bring an understanding of the country’s class dynamics. Winslet, he says, was on board as soon as she read the script, and committed to Lee’s very physical and lengthy way of working, spending four months before the shoot building the character.  

‘Kate, as an actor, has no vanity,’ Lee says. ‘She went out and fossilled on those beaches in Lyme Regis for weeks and weeks and really learned how to do it all. She climbed those cliffs and got dirty, wet, tired and achy. She just threw herself into all of that.’  

Ronan, Lee says, brings to Charlotte the ability to transform from ‘a doll into a fully grown, empowered woman’ – and was equally game, though her role required less physical grit and more needlework and piano practice.  

Lee eschews improvisation, seeing extensive preparation rather as a way of enabling those involved to understand ‘how did they become these people in this script?’
Winslet, he says, was adamant that Mary’s motivations and conditions should be clear at all times. ‘Yes, she can be unlikeable, but why is she unlikeable? We have to understand that’s coming from a place of insecurity. Kate was brilliant at safeguarding that.’  

He continues: ‘The wonderful thing about her performance is her stillness and how she portrays all these internalised emotions. We worked very, very hard on those things, because they are very different from who Kate is, and the characters she’s played before.’  

**Isabel Stevens, Sight & Sound, October 2020**

[Credits](https://www2.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/5f29dd40cd28e)<br>
**Ammonite, Australia, UK, USA, 2020, 120 mins<br>**
Directed by: Francis Lee<br>
©: The British Film Institute, 
The British Broadcasting Corporation, Fossil Films Limited<br>
A See-Saw Films production<br>
Developed in association with: BBC Films<br>
Made with the support of the BFI’s Film Fund<br>
Presented by: BFI<br>
A Sony Pictures Releasing International & Stage 6 film release<br>
Presented by: BBC Films<br>
In association with: Cross City Films<br>
International Sales by: Cross City Films<br>
Executive Producers: Simon Gillis, Mary Burke, Rose Garnett, Zygi Kamasa<br>
Produced by: Ian Canning, Emile Sherman, Fodhla Cronin O’Reilly<br>
Co-producers: Rob How, Nicky Earnshaw<br>
Associate Producer: Katherine Bridle<br>
Production Supervisor: Polly Jefferies<br>
Production Co-ordinator: Hannah Jennings<br>
Production Accountant: Jim Hajicosta<br>
Supervising Location Manager: Casper Mill<br>
Location Manager: Eddy Pearce<br>
Post-production Supervisor: Deborah Harding<br>
1st Assistant Director: Simon Hedges<br>
2nd Assistant Director: Gemma Nunn<br>
3rd Assistant Director: Lucy Andrews<br>
Crowd Co-ordinator: Camilla Southwell<br>
Script Supervisor: Tamsin Spivey<br>
Casting Director: Fiona Weir<br>
Written by: Francis Lee<br>
Director of Photography: Stéphane Fontaine<br>
Steadicam Operator: Richard Cornelius<br>
Still and Specials Photographer: Agatha A. Nitecka<br>
Visual Effects: One of Us, Dupe VFX<br>
Special Effects Supervisor: Massimo Vico<br>
Film Editor: Chris Wyatt<br>
Production Designer: Sarah Finlay<br>
Supervising Art Director: Richard Field<br>
Art Directors: Bill Brown, Guy Bevitt<br>
Standby Art Director: Paddy Paddison<br>
Set Decorator: Sophie Hervieu<br>
Graphic Designers: Jess Alexander, Georgina Millett<br>
Production Buyer: Katie Adamson<br>
Prop Master: Ewan Robertson<br>
Costume Designer: Michael O’Connor<br>
Costume Supervisor: Viveene Campbell<br>
Hair and Make-up Designer: Ivana Primorac<br>
Title and Credit Design: Sam Ashby<br>
Composers: Dustin O’Halloran, Volker Bertelmann<br>
Piano: Dustin O’Halloran<br>
Music Performed by: Volker Bertelmann<br>
Orchestra: Budapest Art Orchestra<br>
Music Supervisor: John Boughtwood<br>
Sound Design: Johnnie Burn<br>
Production Sound Mixer: Phil Cape<br>
Re-recording Mixer: Johnnie Burn<br>
Stunt Co-ordinators: Crispin Layfield, 
Daniela Biernat<br>
Geology Consultants: David Tucker, 
Paddy Howe<br>
Geologist: Phil Stephenson<br>
Dialect Coach: Laura Hart<br>
Post-production and Digital Intermediate: Halo<br>
<br>
Cast:<br>
Kate Winslet (Mary Anning)<br>
Saoirse Ronan (Charlotte Murchison)<br>
Gemma Jones (Molly Anning)<br>
James McArdle (Roderick Murchison)<br>
Alec Secareanu (Dr Lieberson)<br>
Fiona Shaw (Elizabeth Philpot)<br>
Sarah White (museum cleaning woman)<br>
Liam Thomas (museum workman)<br>
Sam Parks (curator)<br>
Claire Rushbrook (Eleanor Butters)<br>
Nick Pearse (Three Cups waiter)<br>
Victoria Elliot (Three Cups maid)<br>
Beatrice Curnew, Susie Baxter, Gethin Alderman, Robert J Purdy, Max Dowler, Paul Dodds (party guests)<br>
John Mackay (fine gentleman)<br>
Mladen Petrov (David the postman)<br>
Wendy Nottingham (Charlotte’s maid)<br>
David Juritz, Ben Hancox, James Boyd, Peter Gregson (musicians)<br>
<br>
A Lionsgate UK release<br>
<br>
[NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES](https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=releases&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=)
<br>
**Ammonite**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br><br>
**Sound of Metal**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br><br>
**Nomadland**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br><br>
**First Cow**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br><br>
**After Love**<br>
From Fri 4 Jun<br><br>
**Fargo**<br>
From Fri 11 Jun<br><br>
**The Reason I Jump**<br>
From Fri 18 Jun<br><br>
**Nashville**<br>
From Fri 25 Jun<br><br>
**Ultraviolence**<br>
From Sat 26 Jun<br>
Sat 26 June 14:20 + Q&A with director Ken Fero and contributor Janet Alder<br>
<br>
BECOME A BFI MEMBER<br>
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at bfi.org.uk/join<br>
<br>
BFI PLAYER<br>
We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult & classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals & Free to view. See something different today on player.bfi.org.uk<br>
<br>
Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at www.bfi.org.uk/signup
