---
layout: post
title: Mangrove
published: true
date: 2021-10-22
readtime: true
categories: ['SMALL AXE']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'UK 2020, 128 mins<br> Director: Steve McQueen'
pdf: '2021-10-22-mangrove.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with director Steve McQueen and_ Small Axe _Consultant Paul Gilroy_

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Speaking to _Sight & Sound_ at the time of the release of _Widows_ two years ago, Steve McQueen offered a refreshing challenge to the platitude that our current cultural moment is a TV golden age: ‘Some of this new TV is so rubbish because they try to squeeze every drop and keep it going, even when the narrative has finished,’ McQueen claimed. ‘Moviemaking is about craft, about storytelling… It’s the best form because there is a beginning, a middle and an end. Rather than stretching it out.’

With those remarks in mind, it may seem surprising to find McQueen turning to the small screen for his first post-_Widows_ project. But _Small Axe_, a BBC and Amazon Studios-produced five-part anthology series exploring Black British experiences from the late 1960s to the mid-1980s, is about as far removed as can be imagined from the excesses of the kind of TV that McQueen criticises. The scorching first episode, _Mangrove_, suggests that the series as a whole represents a return to the kind of distilled, focused storytelling and socially relevant themes that distinguished BBC’s _Play for Today_.

That comparison resonates, since _Play for Today_ debuted the same year that the pivotal event dramatised in McQueen’s film took place: the Mangrove March of August 1970. The focus is on the trial of the ‘Mangrove Nine’, a group of West Indian activists charged with incitement to riot and affray after their protest against police racism ended in violent clashes. The trial at the Old Bailey, where two of the group chose to represent themselves, became a cause célèbre, resulting in the first judicial acknowledgement of racism in the British police force.

The subject matter (previously covered by a Horace Ové-produced, Franco Rosso-directed 1973 documentary) could scarcely be more timely. But like other recent films dealing with histories of community activism – Robin Campillo’s widely praised _BPM_ (2017), Mike Leigh’s underrated _Peterloo_ (2018) – _Mangrove_ is all about immersing the viewer in its historical moment rather than hammering home aspects of contemporary relevance. In the case of McQueen’s film, in particular, there’s simply no need. Without any necessity to push, the film speaks directly to the context of Black Lives Matter – as well as referring the viewer back to one of the most polarising moments in _Widows_: the scene depicting the police shooting of a young biracial male character.

At over two hours, _Mangrove_ is by far the longest of the episodes that make up _Small Axe_, and is very much a film of two halves.

The first half focuses on the Notting Hill community where the Trinidadian entrepreneur Frank Crichlow (Shaun Parkes) is opening his new Caribbean restaurant, the Mangrove, which becomes a focal point for the Black community and a target of frequent, racially motivated police raids. With ‘Powell for PM’ graffiti glimpsed on the streets, McQueen and cinematographer Shabier Kirchner immerse us in the community in heartfelt, sensuous ways. When the characters are out, partying on the street, the camera is right there with them, a joyful participant, fluid and tactile, the music perfectly complementing the images. The camera is right in there, too, in the painful scenes of the raids, and in the central protest sequence – after which the film narrows down from a community portrait to the courtroom drama of Frank and his associates’ trial.

The absence of several characters is felt in the second half but the courtroom scenes are handled with dexterity, bringing out the trial’s intricacies clearly and dramatically, and with wily work from Alex Jennings as the judge, Samuel West as the prosecution counsel and Jack Lowden as the Nine’s barrister. Though marred by moments of flat exposition, McQueen and Alastair Siddons’s screenplay brings out the contrasting personalities of a group coming together in a shared cause.

Malachi Kirby brings vibrancy to Darcus Howe, whether weathering domestic strife or proving a theatrical presence in the courtroom as he quotes Shakespeare and ties Sam Spruell’s rancid, scowling PC Pulley in knots. Moving from Marvel’s _Black Panther_ (2018) to real-life Black Panther, Letitia Wright conveys the intellectual precision and practical passion of Altheia Jones. At the centre, Shaun Parkes’s piercing performance alerts us to every shade of frustration, anger, hope, and weariness that Frank feels.

Among the most important films of the year, and certainly one of its filmmaker’s finest, _Mangrove_ sets the bar high for the rest of _Small Axe_ – a series which McQueen hopes to develop further to explore Black lives in other British cities. The possibilities of the project seem wonderfully wide. Both intimate and monumental, _Mangrove_ itself ends on a deliberately low-key, contemplative note that makes memorable use of the Maytals’ Pressure Drop and complicates any sense of triumph. Still, the film’s urgent, intelligent portrait of collective activism and resistance lingers. Connecting us to the past, _Mangrove_ enlightens and empowers us in the present.<br>
**Alex Ramon, _Sight & Sound_, December 2020**

Watching _Mangrove_ felt like home. The sights, sounds, accents, history all radiated a sense of Blackness in Britain that is rarely displayed on a mainstream platform like the BBC. We are so accustomed to the daily diet of Whiteness that we crave and praise the slivers of representation that we are offered. But _Mangrove_ did not hold back, or compromise in its story of Black life. It’s hard to explain how refreshing it was to hear the range of Caribbean accents and the embrace of dialect that will sail far over the heads of many viewers. The soundtrack provided the perfect underscore for the experience.

The realities of police harassment and racism were fully on display. The sense of terror was palpable as each police raid brutally rained down on the Ladbroke Grove restaurant. ‘Under siege’ is the only way to describe how people of that generation saw the police presence, which felt like a colonial force. It is disturbing that many a parallel will be drawn to experiences today. During the court proceedings, the blatant lies of the police officers were starkly and humorously drawn out. The lack of trust in the official version of events is something we have had to price in to how we react to cases involving the police. The irony of the concept of a ‘criminal justice system’ was on full display for the public to see.

_Mangrove_ is the first time I have seen a genuine attempt to represent British Black Power on mainstream television. Darcus Howe and Althea Jones-LeCointe, who represented themselves in the trial, were leaders of the British Black Panther movement, and it should not have taken more than 50 years for part of that story to make it to the small screen.

There is a real attention to detail. We hear of C.L.R. James and his classic work on the Haitian Revolution, The Black Jacobins. We also see Black Dimensions, a grassroots paper, being self-published on a mimeograph machine. The paper could have stood in for countless community publications like the _Abeng_, _Black Voice_ and the _West Indian Gazette_, the first black newspaper, published by activist Claudia Jones. We also see the protests, the slogans and the spirit of resistance that is the first thing that comes to mind whenever I think of our presence in Britain. Not victims, not criminals, but as Darcus Howe put it ‘protagonists’ who shape our own history. The representation of Jones-LeCointe is a landmark because too rarely do we see the indispensable role of Black women in our histories of activism.

The courtroom scenes were especially symbolic, given that one of the untold impacts of British Black Power was to shake up institutions. We see a contempt for the pomp and ceremony of the Old Bailey, and the white men in wigs parading as justice. I’ve spent a lot of time in courtrooms, shadowing my dad who was a criminal defence solicitor, and it was invigorating to see the stale, pale format overturned. The crowded court gallery continually intruded with murmurs of disapproval, laughter and yells of encouragement, and shouts of ‘liard!’ and ‘hallelujah’ gave the proceedings the feel of a community meeting. The ‘not guilty’ verdict is shown to be a result of this subversion of the court system, forcing it to work on our terms and not conforming to the status quo.

My only fear is that the BBC will feel that it has fulfilled its requirement to cover Black power. _Mangrove_ is a great starter to the history of black activism in Britain, but should leave us hungry for far more.<br>
**Kehinde Andrews, _Sight & Sound_, December 2020**<br>

**MANGROVE**  
_Directed by_: Steve McQueen  
_©_: Small Axe Productions Ltd  
_a_ Turbine Studios _and_ Lammas Park _production_  
_Supported by_: Creative England  
_In association with_: Amazon Studios, Emu Films, BBC Studios Distribution, Six Temple Productions  
_For_: BBC, Amazon Studios  
_Presented by_: BBC Film, BBC  
_Executive Producers_: Tracey Scoffield, David Tanner, Steve McQueen  
_Executive Producer for Lipsync_: Norman Merry  
_Executive Producer for BBC Studios Distribution_: Caroline Stone  
_Executive Producer for BBC_: Lucy Richer  
_Executive Producer for BBC Film_: Rose Garnett  
_Produced by_: Michael Elliott, Anita Overland  
_Archive Producers_: Sam Dwyer, Zosia Alchimowicz  
_Line Producer_: Simon Bird  
_Associate Producer_: Helen Bart  
_Associate Producer for Turbine Studios_: Charlotte Andrews  
_Associate Producer for Lammas Films_: Susan Dolan  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Liane Escorza  
_Production Accountant_: Spencer Pawson  
_Unit Manager_: Billie-Jo Jerrom  
_Supervising Location Manager_: Elliott Meddings  
_Location Managers_: Tom Bosanquet, Philip Pinchin  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Emma Zee  
_1st Assistant Director_: Richard Harris  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Antonia Carter  
_3rd Assistant Director_: Danny Scott-Smith  
_Assistant to Steve McQueen_: India Castle-Gibb  
_Crowd Assistant Director_: Adele Elizabeth Orchard  
_Script Supervisor_: Phoebe Billington  
_Casting_: Gary Davy  
_Screenplay by_: Alastair Siddons, Steve McQueen  
_Director of Photography_: Shabier Kirchner  
_Stills Photographers_: Des Willie, Kieron McCarron  
_Digital Grading, Sound, Titles and Visual FX by_: LipSync Post  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Steve Bowman  
_Supervising Editor_: Chris Dickens  
_Editors_: Chris Dickens, Steve McQueen  
_Production Designer_: Helen Scott  
_Supervising Art Director_: Adam Marshall  
_Art Director_: Guy Bevitt  
_Standby Art Director_: Tyrone Hyman  
_Assistant Art Director_: Louise Lannen  
_Set Decorator_: Hannah Spice  
_Series Graphic Designer_: Lizzy Butler  
_Graphic Designer_: Oona Brown  
_Production Buyers_: Zoe Hoare, Aoife Flynn  
_Property Master_: Nick Walker  
_Construction Manager_: Zane McGill  
_Costume Designer_: Lisa Duncan  
_Assistant Costume Designer_: Poppy Moorcroft  
_Costume Supervisor_: Carly Griffith  
_Hair and Make-up Designer_: Jojo Williams  
_Hair and Make-up Supervisor_: Natasha Nikolic-Dunlop  
_Title Design_: Howard Watkins, Julia Hall, Tom Burke, Chloe Tetu  
_Digital Colourists_: Tom Poole, Company 3  
_Original Score by_: Micachu  
_Score Performed by_: Curl, Therapy Garden, Orchestrate  
_Orchestration_: Jessica Dannheisser  
_Music Supervisors_: Ed Bailie, Abi Leland  
_Score Supervisor_: Bridget Samuels  
_Music Editor_: Lewis Morison  
_Sound Mixer_: Ronald Bailey  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Paul Cotterell, James Harrison  
_Dialogue Editor_: Paul Cotterell  
_Sound Effects Editor_: James Harrison  
_Consultants_: Barbara Beese, Ian Macdonald, Selma James, Paul Gilroy  
_Cultural Adviser_: Michael McMillan  
_Historical Adviser_: Robin Bunce  
_Dialect Coach_: Hazel Holder  
_Transport Captain_: Andy Barton<br>

**Cast**<br>
Letitia Wright _(Altheia Jones)_  
Shaun Parkes _(Frank Crichlow)_  
Malachi Kirby _(Darcus Howe)_  
Rochenda Sandall _(Barbara Beese)_  
Alex Jennings _(Judge Edward Clarke)_  
Jack Lowden _(Ian Macdonald)_  
Gary Beadle _(Dol Isaacs)_  
Darren Braithwaite _(Anthony Carlisle Inniss)_  
Richie Campbell _(Rothwell Kentish)_  
Ben Caplan _(Mr Steadman)_  
Thomas Coombes _(PC Royce)_  
Richard Cordery _(Mr Croft)_  
Gershwyn Eustache Jnr _(Eddie Lecointe)_  
Duane Facey-Pearson _(Rupert Boyce)_  
Llewella Gideon _(Aunt Betty)_  
Michelle Greenidge _(Mrs Manning)_  
Derek Griffiths _(CLR James)_  
Shem Hamilton _(Benson)_  
James Hillier _(chief inspector)_  
Tyrone Huggins _(Granville)_  
Jumayn Hunter _(Godfrey Millett)_  
Doreen Ingleton _(Mrs Tetley)_  
Tayo Jarrett _(Linton)_  
Stefan Kalipha _(card player)_  
Akbar Kurtha _(Dr Chadee)_  
Nathaniel Martello _(Rhodan Gordon)_  
Jodhi May _(Selma James)_  
Tahj Miles _(Kendrick Manning)_  
Stephen O’Neill _(magistrate)_  
Telvin Parr _(Titch)_  
Joseph Quinn _(PC Dixon)_  
Jay Simpson _(duty officer)_  
Sam Spruell _(PC Pulley)_  
Joe Tucker _(court officer)_  
Samuel West _(Mr Hill)_<br>

UK 2020<br>
128 mins<br>
<br>


**SMALL AXE A COLLECTION OF FIVE FILMS**<br>
**Mangrove + Q&A with director Steve McQueen and Small Axe Consultant Paul Gilroy**<br>
Fri 22 Oct 17:30<br>
**Lovers Rock + Q&A with director Steve McQueen and actor Dennis Bovell**<br>
Fri 22 Oct 20:50<br>
**Sonic Cinema Presents: Lovers Rock After Party**<br>
Fri 22 Oct (Spiritland in Royal Festival Hall) 22:00-02:00<br>
**Talk: The Making of Small Axe with Steve McQueen, Tracey Scoffield, David Tanner and guests**<br>
Sat 23 Oct 16:00<br>
**Red, White and Blue**<br>
Sat 23 Oct 18:30<br>
**Alex Wheatle**<br>
Sat 23 Oct 20:45<br>
**Education**<br>
Sun 24 Oct 18:10<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
