---
layout: post
title: Lilting
published: true
date: 2021-07-24
readtime: true
categories: ['T A P E  PRESENTS<br> BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM &#63']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'UK 2009, 86 mins<br> Director: Hong Khaou'
pdf: '2021-07-24-lilting.pdf'
---

_Lilting_ – the debut feature by Cambodian-born, UK-based Hong Khaou – is a tender, low-key examination of grief, fractured communication and the inherent emotional danger of building one’s whole life around a single person.

It stars Ben Whishaw as Richard, a young man reeling from the recent death of his boyfriend, Kai (Andrew Leung). In a haze of grief, Richard visits Kai’s mother Junn (famed Chinese actress Cheng Pei Pei) at the drab retirement home where she was guiltily secreted by her son shortly before his death. Richard is met with a frosty reception; the isolated, non-English speaker Junn was heavily dependent on Kai for company and support, and is resentful of Richard for hogging her only son’s precious time. She is, however, apparently oblivious to the fact that Richard and Kai were an item. Borne of a desire to keep Kai’s memory alive through Junn and achieve a personal sense of closure, Richard resolves to forge a relationship with the resentful lady, and spots his opportunity when he discovers that she is dating an old English gent (Peter Bowles, amusingly dry). Ostensibly to oil the wheels of the elderly lovebirds’ relationship, Richard employs a friendly young British-Chinese woman named Vann (the lively, likeable Naomi Christie) to act as an interpreter.  

The ensuing narrative quietly makes hay from intricately exploiting the tense, cavernous spaces that emerge between what’s verbalised and what isn’t (how long, for example, can poor Richard keep his and Kai’s secret?) and between what’s intended and understood: thanks to the delicate, multilingual set-up, almost every exchange carries an unpredictable dramatic charge.

_Lilting_, the latest offering from Film London and BBC Films’ Microwave scheme for low-budget independent cinema (its budget: £120,000), began life as a play. Though it’s not difficult to imagine it being staged successfully, the material translates well to film, and even suits its low budget. The small cast and limited range of locations add to the overall aura of intimacy, while Khaou makes excellent use of cinema-specific techniques. He frequently employs searching close-ups and tight framing to accentuate characters’ isolation, highlighting the importance of their gestures and facial expressions. There are, for example, a number of finely wrought close-ups of Cheng, who gives a subtle, still performance of bruised stoicism, with flashes of irrepressible irritation. Junn’s backstory – she is a disillusioned Cambodian-Chinese immigrant unwilling and unable to acclimatise to new surroundings – constitutes one of the film’s most quietly moving threads.

Lilting also benefits from intelligent use of elliptical transitions, which often collapse temporal states without the need for an edit. Khaou’s biggest formal gamble is to periodically and unexpectedly insert disorienting sequences of Kai interacting with either Richard or Junn; his scenes with Richard take the form of intimate flashbacks, while those with Junn have a more hallucinatory quality, made notable by Ula Pontikos’s slightly impressionistic cinematography. It’s a smart use of form to keenly evoke that strange, hard-to-communicate time in the aftermath of a bereavement, when the departed person remains a palpable presence despite their corporeal absence. One long take set in a greasy-spoon café morphs imperceptibly from a business-like discussion between Richard and Vann to another, more personal chat between Richard and Kai. Gradually it dawns on us why Richard has chosen to take Vann to this particular café: because memories of his relationship are rooted there.

Intriguingly, in play form, _Lilting_ didn’t feature a gay theme: the Richard character was the widower of a suddenly deceased woman. However, Khaou – who for a number of years worked as head of home entertainment at specialist UK LGBT distributor Peccadillo Pictures – made the change to add a further layer of dramatic intrigue. It works beautifully, and carries an added resonance given recent developments in the trajectory of LGBT cinema. In a recent article for the _Guardian_, the critic Ben Walters convincingly situated _Lilting_ in a current trend of ‘backward-looking’ LGBT cinema that has emerged in a time of ‘apparent legal equality, with less demand for big-screen expressions of cathartic angst or romantic wish-fulfilment’. This trend, continued Walters, includes ‘small-scale, naturalistic, bittersweet’ works characterised by ‘present-mindedness and a willingness to explore grief, so often deferred through the years of struggle’.

In this respect, Khaou’s f’lm resembles Xavier Dolan’s _Tom at the Farm_ (2013), in which a closeted copywriter appears at the house of his late boyfriend’s mother, who was oblivious to her son’s sexuality. Instead of the roiling erotic tension and Chabrol-esque intrigue of the young Canadian’s film, however, _Lilting_ is a quieter, more reflective affair. Its gentle approach more keenly recalls Neil Hunter and Tom Hunsinger’s sorely underrated, Essex-set _Lawless Heart_ (2001), itself a character-led drama set directly in the aftermath of the death of a gay man’s partner. _Lilting_ also puts me strongly in mind of Michael Winterbottom’s Chekhov-inspired masterpiece _Wonderland_ (1999), with which it shares not an LGBT theme but a quiet naturalism and a strong sense of London – frequently depicted on film as a bustling metropolis – as a lonely, chilly place. Like _Wonderland_, _Lilting_ largely excises London ‘landmark’ imagery from the frame. Instead, there are mere flashes of city iconography – a reflection of a red bus here, a rushing train there – all of which evoke a thematically apposite sense of transience and impermanence.

Though in most respects a remarkably confident and composed first feature, _Lilting_ is not without its flaws. Leung gives a spirited turn in his limited screen time, but he is not (yet) in the same class as Whishaw, and the imbalance in the quality of their acting – particularly in crucial, intimate scenes – can be striking. I was also a little sceptical about Khaou’s decision to withhold the exact circumstances of Kai’s death until such a late juncture in the story – the film has enough authentic, character-rooted drama for this lie of omission to come across as an unnecessarily manipulative leveraging of suspense.

The final word should be reserved for Whishaw, who gives an extraordinarily moving performance as the grieving man. The first time I saw him in action was nine years ago, when he played the small but memorable role of put-upon PA Pingu in _Nathan Barley_, Chris Morris and Charlie Brooker’s scathing satire of clueless Shoreditch media types. _Barley_ was a show of outsize comic performances and baroque cruelty – poor Pingu is electrocuted by his hipster-monster boss – but, amid all the madness, Whishaw communicated a bruised, tragic sadness that would have tonally unbalanced the show had he been on screen for any great length of time. With his limpid eyes, gentle voice and rangy yet fragile physicality, Whishaw brings the same heartbreaking qualities to _Lilting_, and he’s in almost every scene. His embodiment of grief is utterly convincing, and he gives an unselfish performance, vacillating fluidly between compassion, petulance and tenacity, all the while seeming so vulnerable that he could shatter into a million pieces at any moment. One lump-in-the-throat reaction shot of Richard, coming after Junn unexpectedly compliments his technique of using chopsticks to fry bacon – a technique obviously taught to him by Kai – might be the most quietly devastating piece of acting I’ve seen all year.<br>
**Ashley Clark, _Sight & Sound_, September 2014**<br>

**Taarof: A Verbal Dance**<br>
_Taarof: A Verbal Dance_ tells the story of Nazanin, a young Iranian woman who was born and raised in England. The film opens on the funeral of her estranged father whom we soon realise she lost touch with prior to his death. Not only does she have to face the death of a loved one she lost touch with but she also has to face an army of estranged relatives and a culture that she once knew very well.

_Taarof_ tells the story of loss, of being an outsider even within your own culture, of finding one's own identity and of living one's truth. It aims to show that there is no correct way to grieve, no matter what cultural expectations we may have put on us by those around us.<br>
**taarofshortfilm.com**<br>

**LILTING**<br>
_Directed by:_ Hong Khaou<br>
_Production Companies:_ Lilting Productions, Microwave<br>
_Presented by:_ Film London<br>
_In Association with:_ BBC Films, Stink,Sums Film & Media<br>
_With Funding from:_ The National Lottery, BFI<br>
_Produced by_: Dominic Buchanan<br>
_For Film London:_<br>
_Head of Production and Talent Development:_ Maggie Ellis<br>
_Creative Producer (Microwave):_ Mia Bays<br>
_Business and Finance Producer (Microwave):_ Mike Kelly<br>
_Development and Production Officer:_ Tessa Inkelaar<br>
_Talent Development Manager:_ Kevin Dolan<br>
_Stills Photographer:_ James Dewar<br>
_For BBC Films:_<br>
_Executive Producer:_ Steve Jenkins<br>
_Marketing Executive:_ Jacqui Barr<br>
_For Stink:_<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Robert Herman, Daniel Bergmann<br>
_For Sums:_<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Andy Brunskill, Robert Benton, Simon Flamenk<br>
_Line Producer:_ Donna Mabey<br>
_Production Manager_: Hazel Falck<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Lynne Samuelson<br>
_Location Managers:_ Lex Donovan, Ross Monaghan<br>
_Location Scouts:_ Owen Twort, Lorna Ford, Andy Ross<br>
_Picture Post Production by:_ LipSync Post<br>
_Post Producer:_ Aileen McIntosh<br>
_Production Assistant:_ Pascal Le Comte<br>
_Runners:_ Hayleigh Roberts, Ryan Delahunty<br>
_1st Assistant Director_: Jon Midlane<br>
_2nd Assistant Director:_ Emlyn Pool<br>
_3rd Assistant Director:_ Jeannette Sutton<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Zara Carnagie<br>
_Casting Director:_ Kharmel Cochrane<br>
_Written by_: Hong Khaou<br>
_Director of Photography_: Ula Pontikos<br>
_Gaffer:_ Bernie Rostoski<br>
_Best Boy:_ Paul Starkey<br>
_Grips:_ Frederico Lopez, Tom Pittman<br>
_Lighting Technicians:_ John Harris, Salvador Gomez-Lopez<br>
_Focus Puller:_ Karl Hui<br>
_D.I.T.:_ James Ian Gray<br>
_Clapper Loader:_ Anca Badita<br>
_Camera Trainee:_ Jonathan Tomlin<br>
_Stills Photographer_: Stuart Hendry<br>
_Editor_: Mark Towns<br>
_Assistant Editor:_ Philip Michael<br>
_Production Design_: Miren Maranon<br>
_Art Director:_ Augusta Akerman<br>
_Art Department:_ Francesca Massariol, Freddy dos Santos, Evannia Paine<br>
_Set Dresser_: Emily Jayne Armitage<br>
_Construction Manager:_ Michael Mulligan<br>
_Prop Buyer:_ Jerry Bland<br>
_Property Master:_ Nikola Wake<br>
_Painter:_ Ben Reynolds<br>
_Illustrator:_ Irene Fuga<br>
_Title Design:_ Christian Morhring, Frauke Stegmann<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Camille Benda<br>
_Costume Supervisor:_ Laura Venables<br>
_Costume Standby:_ Frances Scott<br>
_Make-up and Hair Designer:_ Annette Field<br>
_Make-up and Hair Artist:_ Katie Lee<br>
_Head of DI:_ James Clarke<br>
_Senior Online Editor:_ Connan McStay<br>
_Colourists:_ Scott Goulding, Lee Clappison<br>
_Music Composed by_: Stuart Earl<br>
_Music Supervision:_ Connie Farr, Thinksync Music<br>
_Dance Choreographer:_ Raymond Chai<br>
_Sound Recordist:_ Pete Cowasji<br>
_Boom Operator:_ David Turnbull<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Anna Bertmark<br>
_Executive Sound Editor_: Joakim Sundström<br>
_Sound Re-Recording Mixer:_ Howard Bargroff<br>
_Assistant Sound Re-Recording Mixer:_ Matt Johns<br>
_Foley Artist:_ Ulf Olausson<br>
_Foley Recordist:_ Lotta Nilsson<br>
_Acting Coach:_ Giles Foreman<br>
_Mandarin Translator:_ Lillian Chia<br>
_Pinyin Translator:_ Jon Oiartzun<br>
_Film London Microwave Mentors:_<br>
_Producer Mentor:_ Ken Marshall<br>
_Writer Mentor:_ Peter Ettedgui<br>
_Director Mentor:_ Clio Barnard<br>

**Cast**<br>
Ben Whishaw _(Richard)_<br>
Cheng Pei Pei _(Junn)_<br>
Andrew Leung _(Kai)_<br>
Morven Christie _(Margaret)_<br>
Naomi Christie _(Vann)_<br>
Peter Bowles _(Alan)_<br>

UK 2013<br>
86 mins<br>
<br>

**TAAROF: A VERBAL DANCE**<br>
_Writer and Director:_ Alannah Olivia<br>
_Executive Producer/Co-creator:_ Roxy Faridany<br>
_Executive Producer/Head of Hair and Make-up:_ Lizzie Georgiu<br>
_Producer:_ Melinda Kaur<br>
_Casting:_ Emma Compton<br>
_Story Editor:_ Kathleen Beedles<br>
_Cinematography:_ Jaime Ackroyd<br>
_Editor/Co-producer:_ Emma McCleave<br>
_Production Design:_ Graham Robinson<br>
_Art Direction:_ Katerina Michail<br>
_Sound Recordist:_ David Bekkevold<br>
_Boom Operator:_ Maciej Londo<br>

**Cast**<br>
Roxy Faridany _(Nazanin)_<br>
Souad Faress _(Alborz)_<br>
Fatima Adoum _(Shirin)_<br>
Fisun Burgess _(Shadi)_<br>
Nalân Burgess _(Banu)_<br>
Glnaz Maleki _(Elaheh)_<br>
Dae Dash _(Omid)_<br>
Ishpriya Bird _(young Nazanin)_<br>
Lara Alpay _(young Banu)_<br>
Arash Nouri _(prayer man)_<br>

UK 2018<br>
17 mins<br>

**T A P E PRESENTS: BUT WHERE ARE YOU REALLY FROM?**<br>
**Lilting**<br>
Sat 24 Jul 17:20; Fri 30 Jul 20:40<br>
**Head-On (Gegen die Wand)**<br>
Tue 27 Jul 20:40<br>
**Shoot the Messenger + Q&A with director Ngozi Onwurah, hosted by T A P E’s Angela Moneke**<br>
Thu 29 Jul 17:45<br>
**Culture Shock: Short Film Programme + Q&A with UNDR LNDN**<br>
Fri 30 Jul 17:40<br>
**What Will People Say (Hva vil folk si)**<br>
Sat 31 Jul 17:30<br>

T A P E was founded in 2015 as a response to the lack of representation on screen. Find out more about this curatorial collective at **tapecollective.co.uk**<br>
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
