---
layout: post
title: Surge
published: true
date: 2021-05-28
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES AND RE-RELEASES']
tags: [Thriller]
metadata: 'UK, 2019, 100 mins<br> Director: Aneil Karia'
pdf: '2021-05-28-surge.pdf'
---
Most people have thought about jumping the barriers at a train station, but the decision to act is what makes all the difference. Aneil Karia’s debut feature _Surge_ is an examination of that decision, and what follows. From a routine life working in airport security, Joseph (a compelling Ben Whishaw), detaches himself from the rules of society and spirals out of control. Except, he is in control – or he is consciously unbridled, as he struts and runs down the streets of London, escalating his actions into the criminal. Why? We never quite know.

In the first act, we sense a simmering violence. Senses are overwhelmed. He bites down on a fork. Tilts his head slightly. Closes his eyes. He is a jigsaw piece in the wrong puzzle. It’s an effective, nuanced study of a man about to snap. Once he does, it’s a dreamlike rush in which anything seems possible – a series of logical leaps that feel oddly reasonable when we’re zoomed so far into one man’s frantic psyche. Of course you’d decide to rob a bank if the cash machine ate your card and you needed £4.99 for a cable to fix your colleague’s TV. Of course. Joseph tests the world’s boundaries with childlike curiosity. He gatecrashes a wedding like he’s walking through a museum and, in an exquisitely disquieting scene, calmly destroys the furnishings of a luxury hotel room. The act is chilling in its deliberation. Whishaw’s performance is beautifully detailed and unsettling. Joseph’s mannerisms, spasms, adrenaline breathlessness and inappropriate smiles become the film’s language, as the dialogue is very minimal. The story is slight too, though enriched by brief studies of Joseph’s parents, both proud and broken, enough for you to wonder if they’ve made him the way he is. Are we seeing Joseph finally, truly living? Although I was unconvinced by a sex scene with his colleague (a symbol of his newfound self-abandon, but it feels as though she is used – by him, by the film), and the lack of consequences for his actions reads as implausible, _Surge_ is consistently engaging and disturbing. It seems uninterested in pathologising – rather pointing to a shared human condition: filling a desperate void. We sense that Joseph won’t be the last to reach this point of no return.<br>
**Naomi Obeng, _Sight & Sound_, June 2021**

**Rising star Aneil Karia**

**Who is he?** A dynamic and unconventional director who grabbed attention in 2013 when his short film _Beat_ blazed through the film festival circuit. Since then he has bounded fearlessly across shorts, music video and TV.

**His background:** Karia studied journalism and worked as a producer in TV news before landing a place at the National Film and Television School.

**His films:** Breakthrough short _Beat_ is a visceral, challengingly ambiguous film that follows an unnamed character, played by Ben Whishaw, as he walks a fine line between euphoria and breakdown. Karia’s feature _Surge_ (also starring Whishaw) develops that project, taking the audience on a psychic odyssey with a disenchanted airport security worker called Joseph. Both works channel a frenetic energy: ‘A lot of my filmmaking is a reaction to living in a huge pulsing organism like London, its mood and atmosphere is constantly shifting.’

Karia’s highly regarded work on the TV drama _Top Boy_ led to hybrid music video project _Trouble_ with veteran grime artist Kano. This, in turn, led to collaboration with Riz Ahmed on the terrifying, dystopic _The Long Goodbye_, in which a British Asian family is rounded up by the far right: it won a British Independent Film Award for best British short film this year. For Karia, the film felt urgent: ‘I thought: we can’t get this out quick enough but God only knows how it’s going to be received. And then we just had this amazing response, especially from the British South Asian community. It felt really important and moving.’<br>
**_Sight & Sound_, June 2021**


**Surge**<br>
_Directed by_: Aneil Karia<br>
©: Banana Gun Films Limited, British Broadcasting Corporation, The British Film Institute<br>
_A_ Rooks Nest _production_<br>
_Developed with the assistance of_: BBC Films<br>
_Developed with the support of_: Creative England via the BFI Network<br>
_Made with the support of the_: BFI’s Film Fund<br>
_Logo_: National Lottery<br>
_Presented by_: BBC Films, BFI<br>
_In association with_: Protagonist Pictures, Split Prism Media<br>
_International Sales_: Protagonist Pictures<br>
_Executive Producers_: Rose Garnett, Eva Yates, Lizzie Franke, Will Norton, Dave Bishop, Isabelle Stewart<br>
_Produced by_: Julia Godzinskaya, Sophie Vickers<br>
_Co-producer_: Scott O’Donnell<br>
_Line Producer_: Tim Dennison<br>
_For Rooks Nest (Development & Production Executive)_: Amy Wells<br>
_For BBC Films: Head of Production & Finance_: Michael Wood; _Head of Legal & Business Affairs_: Geraldine Atlee; _Legal & Business Affairs Manager_: Helen Giles; _Production Executive_: Emma Kayee; _Developement Executive_: Sam Gordon; _Head of Communications_: Emma Hewitt<br>
_For BFI: Production & Development Executive:_ Emma Duffy; _Head of Production_: Fiona Morham; _Head of Production Finance_: Ian Kirk; _Director of Legal & Business Affairs_: Clare Coulter<br>
_For Protagonist Pictures: Managing Director, Sales & Distribution_: Vanessa Saal; _Head of Sales_: George Hamilton; _Commercial Director)_: James Pugh; _Director of Operations)_: Anne-Lise Fernandez; _International Sales Manager_: Charlotte Lopez<br>
_Production Manager_: Anna Jancsó<br>
_Additional Production Manager_: Robert K. Harm<br> 
_Production Co-ordinator_: Faye Robinson<br>
_Production Accountant_: Eddie Kane<br>
_Unit Manager_: Alex Waterhouse<br>
_Location Manager_: Iain Smith<br>
_Post-production Supervisor_: Nadiya Luthra<br>
_1st Assistant Director_: Matthew Alder<br>
_2nd Assistant Director_: James R. Kipping<br> 
_Script Supervisor_: Bhairavi Patel<br>
_Casting Director_: Lara Manwaring<br>
_Screenplay by_: Rupert Jones, Rita Kalnejais<br> 
_Story by_: Aneil Karia, Rupert Jones, Rita Kalnejais  
_Director of Photography_: Stuart Bentley  
_1st Assistant Camera_: Adam Conlon  
_2nd Assistant Camera_: Evelina Engberg Norgren  
_Gaffer_: Bill Rae Smith  
_Best Boy_: Christopher B. Broomfield  
_Key Grip_: Lee Naylor-Vane  
_Stills Photographer_: Will Grundy  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: James Allen  
_Visual Effects Executive Producer_: Tom Johnson  
_Visual Effects Producer_: Sean Ewins  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Scott McIntyre  
_Editor_: Amanda James  
_1st Assistant Editor_: Tommy Southgate  
_Production Designer_: Alexandra Toomey  
_Art Directors_: Simon Walker, Jenny Ray  
_Standby Art Director_: Catiana Becker  
_Set Decorator_: Charlotte Ball  
_Graphic Designer_: Natalie Preston  
_Production Buyer_: Georgia Carter  
_Prop Master_: Rosie Halliwell  
_Costume Designer_: Charlotte Morris  
_Make-up & Hair Designer_: Lizzie Mair Davies  
_Make-up & Hair Supervisor_: Sally Miura  
_Prosthetics Supervisor_: Barrie Gower  
_Title Design_: Tom Robinson, Stephen Ross  
_Colourist_: Simone Grattarola  
_Original Music by_: Tujiko Noriko  
_Music Supervisor_: Bridget Samuels  
_Original Music Mixed by_: Sam Britton, Will Worsley  
_Movement Coach_: Laura Williamson Biggs  
_Sound Designer_: Paul Davies  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Nadine Richardson  
_Boom Operator_: James Kum  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Andrew Stirk  
_Supervising Dialogue Editor_: Linda Forsén  
_Dialogue Editor_: Morgan Muse  
_ADR Mixer_: Nick Baldock  
_ADR Voice Casting_: Phoebe Scholfield  
_Foley Recording/Editing_: Andrew Stirk  
_Marine Co-ordinator_: Edward Livett  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Andy Bennett  
_Animal Handlers_: Charlotte Wilde, Samantha Dent, Joanna Vaughan, Collette McKenzie  
_Publicity_: Ian Thomson, Isabelle Knight

**Cast**  
Ben Whishaw _(Joseph)_  
Ryan McKen _(Emre)_  
Victor Olamide _(Vincent)_  
Jasmine Jobson _(Lily)_  
Bogdan Kominowski _(Danili)_  
Nish Nathwani _(Jinaid)_  
Laurence Spellman _(Scott)_  
Muna Otaru _(Adaeze)_  
Perry Fitzpatrick _(Bradley)_  
Michael Jenn _(Gideon)_  
Ian Gelder _(Alan, Joseph’s dad)_  
Robin Pearce _(Leo, man in car park)_  
Ellie Haddington _(Joyce, Joseph’s mum)_  
Isla Preston _(5-year-old girl)_  
Daisy Frossard _(mother of 5-year-old girl)_  
Stacha Hicks _(Catherine, toiletries woman)_  
Filipe Donica _(boy with water bottle)_  
Lucy Thackeray _(Siobhan)_  
Nathan Clough _(station guard)_  
Rod Silvers _(tech shop owner)_  
Arunkumar Patel _(convenience store owner)_  
Joanna Neary _(customer in bank)_  
Yohanna Ephrem _(Saanvi)_  
Farah Sardar _(post office manager)_  
Haqi Ali _(man speaking Urdu)_  
Hammed Animashaun _(Durab)_  
Modupe Adeyeye _(Mischa)_  
Danny Devall _(man in hi-viz)_  
Zakiyyah Deen _(hotel receptionist)_  
Chris Coghill _(Hamish, best man)_  
Bradley Taylor _(Patrick, groom)_  
Clare Joseph _(Sarah, bride)_  
Kelly Wenham _(Ellie, maid of honour)_  
James Walmsley _(father of the bride)_  
Carol Holt _(mother of the bride)_  
Imogen Daines _(prissy wedding guest)_  
Anita Potter _(wedding guest with wine)_  
Kieron Jecchinis _(crash waitress)_  
Patricia Loveland _(woman in car)_  
Dan Skinner _(Theo, driver of car)_  
Finn Bennett _(teenager at crash)_  
Matthew Moses _(fruit and veg seller)_  
Ranjit Singh Shubh _(bank security guard)_  
Josh Finan _(Jermaine)_  
Binal Trivedy, Freya Trivedy, Sejal Jhalla, Asha Valera, Minnati Shah, Yana Patel, Kavita Amin, Donal Patel, Krupaa Vaghela _(Indian dancers)_  

UK 2019 ©<BR>
100 mins<br>

_Courtesy of Vertigo Releasing_
<br><br><br>

**NEW RELEASES & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Ammonite**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**Sound of Metal**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**Nomadland**<br>
From Mon 17 May<br>
**First Cow**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**Surge**<br>
From Fri 28 May<br>
**After Love**<br>
From Fri 4 Jun<br>
**Fargo**<br>
From Fri 11 Jun<br>
**The Reason I Jump**<br>
From Fri 18 Jun<br>
**Nashville**<br>
From Fri 25 Jun<br>
**Ultraviolence**
From Sat 26 Jun; Sat 26 June 14:20 + Q&A with director Ken Fero and contributor Janet Alder<br>

<br><br>
**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**<br>
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at **[bfi.org.uk/join](https://www.bfi.org.uk/become-bfi-member)**

**BFI SOUTHBANK**<br>
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.

We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.

**BFI PLAYER**<br>
We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult & classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals & Free to view. See something different today on **[player.bfi.org.uk](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)**

**Join the BFI mailing list** for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at **[www.bfi.org.uk/signup](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)**

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk).**
