---
layout: post
title: Annette
published: true
date: 2021-09-10
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Musical]
metadata: 'France/Germany/Japan/Belgium/Mexico/Switzerland/USA 2020, 139 mins<br> Director: Leos Carax'
pdf: '2021-09-10-annette.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING  The following notes give away the film’s ending.**

The death of cinema has been proclaimed so frequently across the medium’s relatively short lifespan that the notion is now a cliché. Still, the pandemic managed to sound the knell with renewed force. And when last year’s Cannes Film Festival, after a postponement and much demurral, was finally cancelled, the decision’s symbolism struck as particularly dire. If Cannes 2021 is to represent cinema’s glorious rebirth, as festival director Thierry Frémaux and co. certainly intend it to, then opening with the new film by Leos Carax, a director whose every outing is at once a celebration and a reinvention of the art form, was brilliantly apropos.

In fact, the legendary critic Serge Daney long ago anointed Carax cinema’s saviour during the festival, back in 1984, upon discovering the then-23-year-old’s debut _Boy Meets Girl_. The exceptional cine-literacy that so impressed Daney has since become Carax’s signature, as his films continue to draw openly and liberally from past genres and masters.

That _Annette_, his sixth feature and first in English, should be a musical is the culmination of a movement discernible across his oeuvre. Scenes such as Denis Lavant’s sprinting, spasmodic dance to David Bowie’s ‘Modern Love’ in _Mauvais Sang_ (1986) and its mixtape upgrade in _Les Amants du Pont Neuf_ (1991), with Lavant and Juliette Binoche hurling themselves across the Pont Neuf in Paris while the sky explodes in a million colours during the Bastille Day fireworks, already expressed a keen affinity with musicals. And the succession of spectacular set pieces that make up _Holy Motors_ (2012) could easily have structured one, a potential underlined in the finale when Kylie Minogue brings the narrative to its emotional climax by bursting into a song whose Disney-like lyrics Carax had written.

The soundtrack for _Holy Motors_ also included ‘How Are You Getting Home?’ by Sparks, the duo made up of brothers Ron and Russell Mael, who would later send Carax a treatment idea for a musical, along with some 20 demos, which eventually became _Annette_. The kinship between band and director is hardly surprising: both are pop pioneers in their respective idioms who revel in mixing high sophistication with oddball, often puerile humour.

What it has engendered is a script with dialogue composed of lyrics replete with dorky rhymes – though in large part delivered in recitative à la Jacques Demy – and very likely the only musical ever to contain not just one but two scenes of cunnilingus. In the first, the couple alternately sing ‘We love each other so much!’ until they climax in unison with the song, while the second occasions a masterpiece of a match cut from the ecstasy of orgasm to that of childbirth (‘Breathe in! Breathe out! Push, push!’ sings a chorus of doctors  and nurses).

This interplay between the high and the low is embodied by Adam Driver and Marion Cotillard’s lovers: Henry is a stand-up comedian, Ann is an opera singer; he dresses in green, she in red; ‘I killed them,’ he says of his audience after a show; ‘I saved them,’ she replies about her own. The dialectic extends to the film’s form, as Carax employs a hypermodern aesthetic to tell an archetypal story of showbiz romance that turns from idyll to tragedy.

The saturated palette of Caroline Champetier’s emphatically digital photography renders even real locations artificial, so that the film can move effortlessly from the streets of downtown Los Angeles to a Cocteau-like magical forest, to a boat caught in a raging rear-projected storm, to a concert attended by tens of thousands in a stadium fully rendered in CGI.

Of the myriad outlandish touches, the most out-there must be that Henry and Ann’s baby daughter Annette is portrayed by a disconcerting marionette with visible joints like Pinocchio, hair like Chucky and a face like Anomalisa (as well as jug ears like her father). It is never not funny when the parents cuddle and sing to this grotesque little monster, doting on her as if she were an angel.

Where the film isn’t balanced is in the interest Carax shows for his lead actors and their respective characters (something that holds true for all his features except _Les Amants du Pont Neuf_). Cotillard, whose singing is aided in postsynch by professional soprano Catherine Trottmann, is given little to do in her opera scenes, and since Ann serves as the saintly counterpart to the ever more demonic Henry, she’s inevitably less compelling. Driver, on the other hand, gets to step in for Denis Lavant and show off his physicality, contorting himself through two virtuosic stand-up sequences, and from the halfway point it becomes in effect a one-man show. (There’s actually another character, a conductor and love rival played by Simon Helberg, but he’s barely an afterthought.)

Undoubtedly, the bias stems from Carax’s personal investment in Henry.  In that review from 1984, Daney noted the strong personal dimension to the budding auteur’s film, recognising Lavant’s protagonist as an alter-ego.  This too has since become a trademark and _Annette_ may well be his most nakedly autobiographical work. Anyone unfamiliar with Carax’s life might not necessarily pick up on a short moment in the prelude when, in a recording studio with Sparks, he asks a teenage girl called Nastya to join him by the console. Her identity becomes clear in the finale, which sees Henry in jail and, through cosmetic trickery, bearing a striking resemblance to Carax. Annette comes to visit and after transforming into a real girl (Devyn McDowell) she confronts him in a duet, laying bare the suffering caused by his egocentrism. It’s the one song that relinquishes drollery in favour of pure emotion and it lends a new, devastating perspective to the spiralling darkness of the film’s second half.

It isn’t crucial to know that Carax’s partner, the actress Yekaterina Golubeva, died in 2011 when their daughter Nastya was six years old, and of course it would be foolish to read _Annette_ literally as a _mea culpa_. Nevertheless it’s remarkable that Carax should want to wrestle his demons so publicly. And it is our privilege that he keeps doing so.  
**Giovanni Marchini Camia, _Sight and Sound_, September 2021**
<br><br>

**ANNETTE**  
_Directed by_: Leos Carax  
_Production Companies:_ CG Cinéma International, Tribus P Films International, Arte France Cinéma, Theofilms, UGC, Detail Film, Scope Pictures, Wrong Men, RTBF (Télévision Belge), Eurospace Piano Garidi Films  
_Produced by:_ Charles Gillibert,  Paul-Dominique Vacharasinthu, Adam Driver  
_Co-producers:_ Fabian Gasmia, Geneviève Lemal, Benoît Roland, Arlette Zylberberg, Kenzo Horikoshi, Julio Chavezmontes, Consuelo Frauenfelder, Grégoire Melin  
_Screenplay_: Ron Mael, Russell Mael  
_Story_: Ron Mael, Russell Mael, Leos Carax  
_Director of Photography_: Caroline Champetier  
_Editor_: Nelly Quettier  
_Art Director_: Florian Sanson  
_Costumes_: Pascaline Chavanne  
_Make-up & Hair:_ Bernard Floch  
_Marionettes:_ Estelle Charlier, Romuald Collinet  
_Music and Songs:_ Sparks [Ron Mael, Russel Mael]  
_Music Supervisor:_ Pierre-Marie Dru  
_Executive Music Producers:_ Pierre-Marie Dru, Marius de Vries  

**Cast**  
Adam Driver _(Henry McHenry)_  
Marion Cotillard _(Ann Desfranoux)_  
Simon Helberg _(orchestra conductor)_  
Devyn McDowell _(Annette)_

France/Germany/Japan/Belgium/Mexico/Switzerland/USA 2020  
139 mins
<br><br>

**NEW RELEASES &  RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Souad**<br>
Continues from Fri 27 Aug<br>
**Wildfire**<br>
From Fri 3 Sep<br>
**Candyman**<br>
From Fri 3 Sep<br>
**Annette**<br>
From Fri 10 Sep<br>
**Sweet Thing**<br>
From Fri 10 Sep<br>
**The Maltese Falcon**<br>
From Fri 17 Sep<br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Doctor Who: The Evil of the Daleks (animated)**<br>
Sun 12 Sep 12:00<br>
**Preview: Sweetheart + Q&A with director  Marley Morrison**<br>
Mon 13 Sep 17:50<br>
**Prime Suspect: 30th Anniversary (First Series Complete Screening)**<br>
Sun 19 Sep 14:00<br>
**Lynda La Plante in Conversation**<br>
Sun 19 Sep 18:45<br>
**Preview: Convergence + Q&A with director Orlando von Einsiedel and co-director and film contributor Hassan Akkad**<br>
Wed 29 Sep 19:00<br>
**60th Anniversary: Whistle Down the Wind  + actor Hayley Mills in Conversation**<br>
Sun 3 Oct 12:00<br>
**Preview: Dune + pre-recorded Q&A  with Denis Villeneuve**<br>
Tue 5 Oct 18:30<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTg1MDMyNjM1NF19
-->
