---
layout: post
title: The Northman
published: true
date: 2022-04-22
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Action, Adventure, Period]
metadata: 'USA-Luxembourg-UK-China 2022, 137 mins<br> Director: Robert Eggers'
pdf: '2022-04-22-northman.pdf'
---

The word ‘visionary’ has been grossly devalued in the world of cinema. For a long time, ‘visionary director’ has pretty much meant anyone with an excitable publicist, a sturdy CGI budget and a knowledge of art history extending slightly beyond the frames of the classic Marvel comics. But what might visionary filmmaking actually mean today? For the purposes of argument, let’s imagine: work that aspires to transcend the usual restraints of genre and the familiar, or to infuse the generically familiar with some dimension of the irreducibly strange, even the mystical.

In that sense, it’s fair to classify Robert Eggers’ new film _The Northman_ as a visionary epic – although hardly an unproblematic one. It’s also fair to say that Eggers is a director of visionary aspirations in the way that his three features to date kick at the usual parameters of historical drama. They are hybrid ventures, fusing historical realism with genre elements (horror, myth, the supernatural), but are also rich in visual and verbal invention which are the fruit of fairly scholarly research. With a background in directing and designing for the stage, Eggers made his feature debut with _The Witch_ (2015), subtitled ‘A New England Folktale’, in which a 17th-century Puritan family encounters baleful forces in the New World: a nightmare as much informed by Freud as by the likes of Nathaniel Hawthorne. It was followed by _The Lighthouse_ (2019), a febrile two-hander with Robert Pattinson and Willem Dafoe as men spiralling into mad-eyed desperation on a remote maritime outpost. The imagery (Eggers’ features are all shot by Jarin Blaschke) was steeped in the inky chiaroscuro of Gustave Doré’s engravings, while the language, reeking of brine and baccy, was decanted from such 19th-century sources as mariners’ journals and the writing of Herman Melville.

Now comes _The Northman_, a film considerably grander in ambition. Inspired by the spirit of Icelandic sagas, it aims to live up to its epic sources: as Eggers told me recently, he and his co-writer, the Icelandic poet and novelist Sjón, wanted ‘to make _the_ Viking movie – to have the movements that you want in a Viking movie, but also defy expectation where we can, in ways that are true to that world. We wanted it be a movie – but also a Viking saga.’

Set in the ninth century, _The Northman_ begins with Nordic king Aurvandil (Ethan Hawke) returning home from his latest raid, greeted by his queen Gudrún (Nicole Kidman), their young son Amleth (Oscar Novak) and his brother Fjölnir (Claes Bang). But Fjölnir has his eyes on the throne, and on Gudrún, and springs a bloody coup. Young Amleth flees; years later, played by Alexander Skarsgård, he has become a brutal, muscled-up warrior, a berserker, of the sort liable to bite a chunk out of an enemy’s neck and howl like a wolf (strictly speaking, the actual berserkers were more ursine: the word is derived from ‘_berserkr_’, meaning bearskin).

Then a shamanic seer (who else but Björk, eyes blacked out and wearing a headdress resembling half a cornfield) reveals to Amleth his destined mission of revenge. The name will have tipped you off: _The Northman_ is essentially cinema’s latest reworking of _Hamlet_. But this is not straight Shakespeare: the film looks back to an earlier version of the _Hamlet_ story, by the 12th/13th-century Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus.

Using a familiar source, Eggers says, allowed the film to stretch out imaginatively. ‘It needed to be a revenge story, but if we could use _Hamlet_ – a mythic family drama that everyone knows – then we could indulge in what’s unique in Viking culture without confusing the audience. Unlike Arthurian legend, which is weird and mystical and out there, or [ancient Welsh myths] the _Mabinogion_ or whatever, the sagas are pretty straightforward. The mythology is odd, but even the legendary sagas are ripping yarns.’

Eggers’ new film also benefits from the eclectic research that informs all his projects. ‘I’m drawn to the things that confirm what the public might assume they already know about that world – and then the things that are unexpected, that are just as important to that culture. [We have] Vikings coming home from a raid and having a big feast, but it’s not raucous, crazy, sloppy ale frothing out of the horns – it’s very ceremonial and controlled, with specific codes and actions.’ One advantage Eggers has is that, while there’s a small, significant canon of Viking-themed movies, most of us aren’t familiar with a Viking genre per se, meaning he isn’t saddled with conventions. The best-known film of its kind, Richard Fleischer’s 1958 _The Vikings_, feels more like a western, with swords instead of arrows. Indeed, says Eggers, ‘A lot of the sagas read like westerns. If you think about Iceland at the period, it’s like the Wild West – you have big wild landscapes and warring clans, a lawless society that’s trying to become a lawful one.’ (For the record, Eggers has mixed feelings about another recent high-profile take on this material, the TV series _Vikings_: ‘There was some interesting writing. But the level of stylisation in making it really cool and sexy doesn’t appeal to me.’)

Sjón, Eggers’ co-writer on _The Northman_, is acclaimed for his literary work but he co-scripted the recent Icelandic fantasy _Lamb_ (2021). Sjón was originally reluctant to take on a Viking project, Eggers says. ‘Most Icelanders don’t want to have to talk about Viking anything – but they all know what saga characters they’re literally directly related to. I needed someone who had this in their culture, to make this as, quote, authentic as I might try for.’

That authenticity is evident in the film’s use of language, although this is where some viewers might balk. Stretches of dialogue come in English-subtitled Old Norse or Old Slavic – the latter for Anya Taylor-Joy’s character Olga, from the kingdom of Rus. But mostly the actors speak English with heavy Nordic accents – which can sound a little forced. That’s to do with level-headed commercial imperatives: ‘If I were to do my method,’ says Eggers, ‘the film would be in Old Norse and Old Slavic and that’s the end of it. But I knew it was never really on the table.’ As it turned out, one of his models for the dialogue was Seamus Heaney’s 1999 translation of _Beowulf_, ‘which is Old English, not Old Norse – but they’re very similar languages. Sjón and I said, it has to be as understandable as _The Lord of the Rings_.’

Language aside, _The Northman_ is Eggers’ and Blaschke’s most visually ambitious collaboration. The film starts primarily in black and white, but gradually opens up with striking highlights – red and green clothing, blazes of volcanic fire, flashes of bronze. The texture alone is remarkable: a certain  ash-grey, fine-grained moonlight effect genuinely feels like something new in the cinematic palette.

There are overwhelmingly intense battles, not least a long-take sequence in which Amleth’s detachment of Berserkers massacre a village in the kingdom of Rus (early Russia, but the setting is Ukraine, Eggers points out – which gives the story an inescapably uncomfortable thrust right now). The sequence is dazzlingly shot, minutely choreographed, requiring precision and athletic prowess from all concerned. What Eggers and Blaschke wanted from these long takes, the director says, was an effect ‘where the story and the camera and the action are all like one beast moving forward, rather than shooting multiple cameras and figuring it out in the post.’  
**Jonathan Romney, _Sight and Sound_, May 2022**
<br><br>

**THE NORTHMAN**  
_Directed by_: Robert Eggers  
©: Focus Features LLC, Regency Entertainment Inc (USA), Monarchy Enterprises S.a.r.l.  
_Production Companies_: New Regency, Square Peg  
_With funding from_: Northern Ireland Screen  
_Development support provided by_: Pulse Films  
_Presented by_: Focus Features, Regency Enterprises  
_In association with_: Perfect World Pictures  
_With support from_: Film in Iceland  
_Production Services Provided by (Iceland Unit)_: True North  
_Executive Producers_: Yariv Milchan,  Michael Schaefer, Sam Hanson, Thomas Benski  
_Produced by_: Lars Knudsen, Mark Huffam,  Robert Eggers, Alexander Skarsgård,  Arnon Milchan  
_Co-produced by_: Francesca Cingolani  
_Associate Producer_: Garrett Bird  
_Producer (Iceland Unit)_: Leifur B. Dagfinnsson  
_Unit Production Manager_: Alex Boyd  
_Production Manager_: Darren Chesney  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Amy Moore  
_Financial Controller_: Peter Eardley  
_UK Production Accountant_: Nikki Chamberlain  
_Unit Manager_: Seán Logan  
_Supervising Location Manager_: Naomi Liston  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Emma Zee  
_1st Assistant Director_: Ben Burt  
_Key 2nd Assistant Director_: Oana Ene  
_Script Supervisor_: Giuilia Patané  
_Local Casting by_: Carla Stronge  
_Written by_: Sjón, Robert Eggers  
_Director of Photography_: Jarin Blaschke  
_Aerial Director of Photography_: John Marzano  
_A Camera Operator_: Chris Plevin  
_B Camera Operator_: Graham Albert Hall  
_Gaffer_: Seamus Lynch  
_Key Grip_: Darren ‘Dutch’ Holland  
_Still Photographer_: Aidan Monaghan  
_Visual Effects On-set Supervisor_: Colin McCusker  
_Visual Effects Producer_: Wendy Garfinkle  
_Visual Effects by_: Bluebolt, Atomic Arts,  Vitality Visual Effects  
_Additional Visual Effects by_:  Yellowmoon Post Production  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Sam Conway  
_Editor_: Louise Ford  
_Production Designer_: Craig Lathrop  
_Supervising Art Director_: Paul Ghirardani  
_Senior Art Director_: Robert Cowper  
_Art Directors_: Hauke Richter, John Merry  
_Set Decorator_: Niamh Coulter  
_Graphic Designer_: Michael Eaton  
_Concept Artists_: Philipp Scherer,  Thorhallur Thrainsson  
_Costume Concept Artist_: David Craig  
_Senior Draughtsperson_: Brendan Rankin  
_Costume Designer_: Linda Muir  
_Assistant Costume Designer_: Angela Bright  
_Costume Supervisor_: Louise Cassettari  
_Wardrobe Supervisor_: Lucie Corcoran  
_Hair and Make-up Designer_: Maralyn Sherman  
_Make-up & Hair Supervisor_: Stefania Pellegrini  
_Key Make-up & Hair Artist_: Carmel Jackson  
_Make-up & Hair Artists_: Michelle Maxwell,  Orlaith Walsh  
_Make-up & Prosthetic Artist_: Polly McKay  
_Prosthetics Designer_: David White  
_Titles by_: Matt Curtis  
_Supervising Colourist_: Adam Glassman  
_Music by_: Robin Carolan, Sebastian Gainsborough  
_Choir_: London Voices  
_Conductor_: Jessica Cottis  
_Score Recorded and Mixed by_: Nick Wollage  
_Music Consultant_: Poul Høxbro  
_Choreographer_: Marie-Gabrielle Rotie  
_Sound Designers_: James Boyle, Damian Volpe  
_Sound Recordist_: Derek Hehir  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Paul Cotterell,  James Harrison, Mark Taylor  
_Supervising Sound Editors_: James Harrison,  Steve Little  
_Sound Effects Designer_: Tom Sayers  
_Sound Effects Editor_: Kevin Penney  
_Stunt Coordinator_: CC Smif  
_Old Norse Translations_: Hauker Þorgeirsson  
_Old Ukrainian Translations_: Yurii Andrukhovych  
_Master Armourer_: Tommy Dunne  
_Horses Provided by_: The Devil’s Horsemen  
_Horsemaster_: Tom Cox  
_Unit Publicist_: Wendy Kidd  

**Cast**  
Alexander Skarsgård _(Prince Amleth)_  
Nicole Kidman _(Queen Gudrún)_  
Claes Bang _(Fjölnir the Brotherless)_  
Anya Taylor-Joy _(Olga of the Birch Forest)_  
Ethan Hawke _(King Aurvandil War-Raven)_  
Willem Dafoe _(Heimir the Fool)_  
Gustav Lindh _(Thórir the Proud)_  
Elliot Rose _(Gunnar)_  
Phill Martin _(Hallgrímr Half-Troll)_  
Eldar Skar _(Finnr the Nose-Stub)_  
Olwen Fouéré _(Áshildur Hofgythja)_  
Edgar Abram _(Hersveinn Battle Hard)_  
Jack Gassmann _(Hjalti Battle Hasty)_  
Ingvar Sigurdsson _(he-witch)_  
Oscar Novak _(young Amleth)_  
Jack Walsh _(Hallur Freymundur)_  
Björk _(seeress)_  
Ian Whyte _(the mound dweller)_  
Katie Pattinson _(shield maiden)_  
Andrea O’Neill _(Helga the Nanny)_  
Rebecca Ineson _(Halla the Maiden)_  
Kate Dickie _(Halldóra the Pict)_  
Ísadóra Bjarkardóttir Barney _(Melkorka)_  
Kevin James Horsham _(Völundur the Smith)_  
Seamus O’Hara _(Audunn the Irish)_  
Scott Sinclair _(Grímr Skull-Hammer)_  
Tadhg Murphy _(Eiríkr Blaze Eye)_  
James Yates _(Hrólfur Split-Lip)_  
HafÞór Júlíus Björnsson _(Thórfinnr Tooth-Gnasher)_  
Ian Gerard Whyte _(Thórvaldr Giant-Crusher)_  
Ralph Ineson _(Captain Volodymyr)_  
Murray McArthur _(Hákon Iron-Beard)_  
Nille Glæsel _(Gunnhildr Ship-Breasted)_  
Jonas K. Lorentzen _(Eysteinn)_  
Magne Osnes _(Berserker priest)_  
Ineta Sliuzaite _(Valkyrja)_  
Finn Lafferty _(fisherman’s son)_  
Jon Campling _(standard bearer)_  
Helen Roche _(Hofgythja)_  
Faoileann Cunningham _(Kormlöth)_  
Gareth Parket _(the Hird officer)_  
Mark Fitzgerald _(hallucinating guard)_  
Gavin Peden _(burly guard)_  
Joel Hicks _(Fengr Shield-Biter)_  
Christopher Finlayson _(Grani Battle-Screamer)_  
Eric Higgins _(Ketill the Whale Sided)_  
Matt Symonds _(Ragnar Cold-Mouthed)_  
Luca Evans _(Ivan)_  
James Harper-Jones _(Vasill)_  
Thomas Harper-Jones _(Stanislav)_  
Sheila Flitton _(Lyudmila)_  
Lily Bird _(the Maiden King)_

USA/Luxembourg/UK/China 2022©  
137 mins

A Universal release
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTMyMjQwMDcxNV19
-->
