---
layout: post
title: Gremlins
published: true
date: 2022-12-20
readtime: true
categories: ['CHRISTMAS FILMS']
tags: [Comedy, Fantasy]
metadata: 'USA 1984, 106 mins<br> Director: Joe Dante'
pdf: '2022-12-20-gremlins.pdf'
---
**Joe Dante on ‘Gremlins’**

I never happened to believe that _Gremlins_ was a movie that scared children. That was a thing that came up when the movie was released, and there were articles in the paper. They had sold it as an _E.T._ clone – people thought they were going to get this soft, cuddly movie, and then they got this scary green monster movie with creatures that blow their noses on the curtains. And parents were somewhat offended. But I never met a kid who didn’t like it.  I never met a kid who had a nightmare from it. I never met a kid who put his little brother in the microwave! That just didn’t happen, because kids are much smarter than adults give them credit for.

_That was your second project produced by Steven Spielberg, following_ Twilight Zone: The Movie. _Was he a good collaborator?_

He was very filmmaker-friendly. The idea was it was your film: you finished the film, you edited the film, mixed it, cut the negative – then you previewed it.  As it goes, Steven was away during the making of _Gremlins_, because he was making another picture. And during that time, it evolved from a horror film to a comedy. When the studio saw it, they didn’t get it. Then they went to a preview, and all of a sudden they got it – and decided they wanted to do a lot of merchandising! It was really a B movie – but it became the most successful movie I was ever involved with.  
**Interview by James Mottram, _Sight & Sound_, October 2010**  

**A contemporary review**  
In the ‘It’s a Good Life’ episode of the _Twilight Zone_ movie, Joe Dante dealt with an immensely talented superkid who uses his psychic powers to reduce the real world to the primary-coloured two-dimensionality of a Tex Avery cartoon. This might even have been read as a pointed caricature of producer Steven Spielberg’s deadeningly childish influence over that unfortunate project, an influence all too evident in the tacked-on happy ending to what had been, in Jerome Bixby’s original story and Rod Serling’s television adaptation, a memorably vicious picture of infantile malice. Dante, at least, has not found his personality subsumed (unlike Tobe Hooper) in that of his co-executive producer. For both Spielberg and Dante, chaos is inherent in modern America, but Spielberg believes in an apparent order which periodically tears itself apart in the face of a real (_Jaws_, _Duel_) or imagined (_1941_, _Close Encounters of the Third Kind_) threat, while Dante presents a world in perpetual uproar that invariably fails to take any notice of the toothy monsters chewing away at the foundations (_Piranha_, _The Howling_).

_Gremlins_ represents an uneasy synthesis of these subtly different world views. In _1941_, staid Californians become childish cavemen on the least pretext, and in _The Howling_, a group of neurotic werewolves comfortably insinuate themselves into human society. In _Gremlins_, the grown-up characters disappear halfway through the film and are replaced by (rather than turn into) leering, cartoonish caricatures of their former selves. The monster horde, whether brawling and breakdancing in the local bar, indulging in acts of petty mischief with various bits of machinery, or providing a rapt but rowdy audience for _Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs_, are less a fearsome threat than the epitome of unrestrained irresponsibility. A mild _mea culpa_ on the parts of Dante and Spielberg can be detected in the last-minute appearance of Keye Luke, who chides the unworthy Peltzers for corrupting the babyish innocence of the mogwai (‘You taught him to watch television’) and provides a moral homily on man’s misuse of nature’s gifts that is as deeply felt and half-relevant as any of Rod Serling’s _Twilight Zone_ afterwords.

The film opens with a series of references, not to the expected world of Jack Arnold’s 1950s small towns, but to an earlier tradition of Mid-Western wonderment. The studiobound township of Kingston Falls, lightly iced with artificial snow, a folksy paradise threatened only by the spitefulness of corrupt capitalist Mrs Deagle, is the 80s equivalent of Frank Capra-land. While the televised clip from _It’s a Wonderful Life_ might be considered superfluous in the context of such an obvious hommage, there is a subtler bit of movie consciousness in the use of a portrait of Edward Arnold to stand in for the late Mr Deagle. But references to the recession, like those in the John Landis episode of _Twilight Zone the Movie_, suggest that there are social problems in Kingston Falls which couldn’t be solved by James Stewart running down Main Street shouting ‘Merry Christmas’.

Dante and Spielberg react to the town’s problems by childishly trashing the place, and everything it stands for. In an extraordinary funny/horrific monologue, Kate explains that she has hated Christmas ever since her father was found dead in the chimney dressed as Santa Claus. _Gremlins_ also includes a scene in which Father Christmas is throttled by the monsters while two drunken cops refuse to get involved, and contrives to include jibes at such sacred institutions as the YMCA, Walt Disney (among the bat-eared gremlin silhouettes is a dead ringer for Mickey Mouse), Phil Spector’s Christmas Album, and Smokey the Bear. The film’s most sustained assault on house and home comes when Mrs Peltier, the perfect mother, gets rid of the gremlins in her kitchen with the splattery aid of the blender and the microwave oven, and is promptly attacked by what appears to be a libidinous Christmas tree. If the early sections of the movie, which feature a tiresome running gag about the slapstick malfunctions of Rand Peltzer’s inventions, find Dante somewhat lost without the verbal wit of John Sayles, his usual screenwriter, the director comes into his own once the narrative, and the town, has  been wrecked.

The Spielbergian side of the film is, of course, represented by the almost insufferably cuddly Gizmo – an eyeball-rolling, furry creation who outdoes even E.T. in special-effects cuteness – and one feels a kind of malicious relief when the evil Stripe and his cohorts take over the film. The central, anarchic section of _Gremlins_ is nothing more than a disconnected series of violently comic blackout sketches. The stop/start switches between horror and comedy prevent the film from building to a coherent climax (a problem which also afflicts _Ghostbusters_), and so Spielberg has to reassert himself as Gizmo comes racing to his pal Billy’s rescue in a toy car, grinning in imitation of Clark Gable in _To Please a Lady_. However, if _Gremlins_ fails as a grown-up story (the inexplicable disappearance of everyone in town once the monsters take over is awkward, and the gremlin life cycle is idiotic), it succeeds admirably as a wide-eyed conflation of the tinsel of Christmas with the gleeful excess  of Saturnalia.  
**Kim Newman, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, December 1984**  

**GREMLINS**  
_Directed by_: Joe Dante  
_©_: Warner Bros Inc.  
Steven Spielberg _presents_  
_an_ Amblin Entertainment _presentation_  
_Executive Producers_: Steven Spielberg,  
Frank Marshall, Kathleen Kennedy  
_Produced by_: Michael Finnell  
_Unit Production Manager_: Phil Rawlins  
_Production Secretary_: Karen Shaw  
_1st Assistant Director_: James Quinn  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Carol Green  
_Script Supervisor_: Kenneth Gilbert  
_Casting_: Susan Arnold  
_Written by_: Chris Columbus  
_Director of Photography_: John Hora  
_Process Photography_: Bill Hansard  
_Camera Operator_: Michael Jones  
_1st Assistant Cameraman_: Norman Cattell  
_2nd Assistant Cameraman_: Lex Rawlins  
_Gaffer_: Norman Harris  
_Key Grip_: Richard Moran  
_Dolly Grip_: William G. Kenney  
_Still Photographer_: Ralph Nelson Jr  
_Matte Paintings_: Dream Quest Images, Rocco Gioffre  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Bob MacDonald Sr  
_Special Effects Foremen_: Bob MacDonald Jr, Tim Gillette, Ted Shell, David Sosalla,Robert Secrest, Marghe McMahon, Ralph Miller, Kirk Thatcher  
_Animation_: VCE Inc (Sylmar, CA)  
_Stop Motion_: Fantasy II Film Effects  
_Edited by_: Tina Hirsch  
_Assistant Editor_: Tom Finan  
_Production Designer_: James H. Spencer  
_Set Designer_: William Matthews  
_Set Decorator_: Jackie Carr  
_Property Master_: Marty Wunderlich  
_Construction Co-ordinator_: Michael A. Muscarella  
_Men’s Costume Supervisors_: Norman Burza, Linda Matthews  
_Make-up Artist_: Greg La Cava  
_Gremlins Created by_: Chris Walas  
_Gizmo/Gremlins Designed/Created/Operated by_: Chris Walas Inc  
_CWI Project Co-ordinator_: E. Erik Jenson  
_CWI Creature Consultant_: Jon Berg  
_Hairstylist_: Cheri Ruff  
_Titles/Opticals_: Cinema Research Corporation  
_Filmed with_: Panavision Cameras & Lenses  
_Colour by_: Technicolor  
_Colour Timer_: Robert Raring  
_Music by_: Jerry Goldsmith  
_Orchestrations_: Arthur Morton  
_Music Editor_: Kenneth Hall  
_Music Recording Mixers_: Bruce Botnick, Robert Fernandez  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Ken King  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Kevin O’Connell  
_Supervising Sound Editors_: Richard L. Anderson, Mark Mangini  
_Dialogue Editor_: Stephen Purvis  
_Special Vocal Effects_: Frank Welker, Howie Mandel, Fred Newman,  
Mark Dodson, Michael Winslow, Peter Cullen, Bob Berger,  
Mike Sheehan, Bob Holt  
_Foley_: John Roesch, Joan Rowe  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Terry Leonard  
_Animal Co-ordinator_: Ray Berwick  
_Filmed at_: Universal Studios Hollywood  

**Cast**  
Zach Galligan _(Billy Peltzer)_  
Phoebe Cates _(Kate Beringer)_  
Hoyt Axton _(Randall ‘Rand’ Peltzer)_  
Polly Holliday _(Ruby Deagle)_  
Frances Lee McCain _(Lynn Peltzer)_  
Judge Reinhold _(Gerald Hopkins)_  
Dick Miller _(Murray Futterman)_  
Glynn Turman _(Roy Hanson)_  
Keye Luke _(grandfather, Mr Wing)_  
Scott Brady _(Sheriff Frank)_  
Corey Feldman _(Pete Fountaine)_  
Jonathan Banks _(Deputy Brent)_  
Edward Andrews _(Mr Corben)_  
John Louie _(Chinese boy)_  
Don Steele _(Rockin’ Ricky Rialto)_  
Susan Burgess _(little girl)_  
Arnie Moore _(Pete’s father)_  
Harry Carey Jr _(Mr Anderson)_  
Belinda Balaski _(Mrs Harris)_  
Chuck Jones _(Mr Jones)_  
Kenny Davis _(Dorry)_  
John C. Becher _(Doctor Molinaro)_  
Gwen Willson _(Mrs Molinaro)_  
Jackie Joseph _(Sheila Futterman)_  
Joe Brooks _(Dave Meyers, ‘Santa’)_  
Jim McKrell _(Lew Landers, WDHB-TV reporter)_  
Dow Elson _(man on street)_  
Daniel Llewelyn _(hungry Harris child)_  
Lois Foraker _(bank teller)_  
Nick Katt, Tracy Wells _(schoolchildren)_  
Mushroom _(Barney)_  
_uncredited_  
Howie Mandel _(voice of Gizmo)_  
Frank Welker _(voice of Stripe/Mogwai/Gremlins)_  
Fred Newman, Mark Dodson, Michael Winslow, Peter Cullen, Bob Berger, Mike Sheehan, Bob Holt _(voices of Mogwai/Gremlins)_  
Jerry Goldsmith _(man in telephone booth)_  
Robby the Robot _(Robby the robot)_  
Marvin Miller _(voice of Robby the robot)_  
William Schallert _(Father Bartlett)_  
Steven Spielberg _(man in electric wheelchair)_  
Kenneth Tobey _(Mobil gas station attendant)_

USA 1984©  
106 mins  

**CHRISTMAS FILMS**  
**The Bishop’s Wife**  
Mon 5 Dec 14:30; Sat 17 Dec 11:50; Mon 19 Dec 18:10; Wed 21 Dec 18:05  
**The Apartment**  
Wed 14 Dec 14:30; Wed 21 Dec 17:55; Fri 23 Dec 14:30; Tue 27 Dec 12:00  
**It’s a Wonderful Life**  
Fri 16 Dec 18:10; Sun 18 Dec 18:10; Tue 20 Dec 18:10; Thu 22 Dec 14:30 Fri 23 Dec 18:10  
**Tangerine**  
Fri 16 Dec 20:45; Tue 20 Dec 18:20  
**Scrooge**  
Sat 17 Dec 14:50; Wed 21 Dec 14:30  
**Scrooged**  
Sat 17 Dec 18:20; Thu 22 Dec 20:30  
**Carol**  
Sat 17 Dec 20:45; Tue 20 Dec 20:40  
**Tokyo Godfathers (Tokyo goddofazazu)**  
Sat 17 Dec 20:50; Fri 23 Dec 21:00  
**Meet Me in St. Louis**  
Sun 18 Dec 12:15; Mon 19 Dec 14:30; Tue 20 Dec 14:30; Thu 22 Dec 18:05  
**Gremlins**  
Tue 20 Dec 20:30; Thu 22 Dec 18:10  

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTQzMDU1OTI0M119
-->
