---
layout: post
title: Wot! No Art
published: true
date: 2022-06-07
readtime: true
categories: ['ART IN THE MAKING']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'UK 1978, 55 mins<br> Director: Christopher Mason'
pdf: '2022-06-07-wot-no-art.pdf'
---

_Introduced by BFI National Archive Curator Steve Foxon_

Christopher Mason’s documentary presents a retrospective of the arts in the immediate post-war years (1945-51), when patronage for ‘public art’ was intended to promote a cultural renaissance to complement that in education, health and housing. A dream of universal access to Britain’s cultural heritage is shared, with excellent use of archive newsreels, though can the dream be made reality or is art simply a luxury most can’t afford?  
**bfi.org.uk**

Chronologically, _Wot! No Art_ continues the wayward story of the muffled impact of modern art and design on English life begun in Christopher Mason’s _England Home and Beauty_ (centred on the 1930s). The time span is now 1945 to 1951 – the period when the Labour government undertook to improve the people’s lot in education, health and housing. Nor was art neglected: the Arts Council was formed, new towns and schools in Hertfordshire liberally sprinkled modern sculptures and murals about the walls and shopping streets, and a cultural renaissance seemed to be in the air. In tone and style, however, there is little continuity between Mason’s two surveys. _England Home and Beauty_ was a slyly arranged cinematic exhibition of Thirties design (art deco houses, china sets, wall paper, the coloured glass patterns in suburban front doors); some of the examples were imbued with the spirit of modernism, others with ghastly good taste. _Wot! No Art_ probes deeper into the reasons for such muddled attitudes, into the strained relationship between the modern artist, the public and the reflection of both in the media (here, specifically newsreels).

The result is a sturdy, provoking, highly entertaining polemical tract, which rounds off proceedings with the obvious point that the gap between artist and public will only close when art is understood as a basic need and not as an elitist luxury. As with any polemic, some distortions and omissions are necessary to make the argument cohere: throughout, the implication is that the public is far more in need of education than the artist. So the actual examples of art produced in the late Forties (mostly paintings) take second place in Mason’s scheme to archive samplings on the general social and aesthetic state of the nation. As _Before Hindsight_ proved, cinema newsreels are a rich repository of Establishment attitudes, with their half-whimsical, half-snide commentaries capable of describing a lorry carrying prefabricated building materials as a ‘lorryload of love nests’ or the ICA’s retrospective exhibition of modern art as ‘the first of its kind – if you like that kind’.

Mason also includes brief interviews with the public of today – the people who are still living in their temporary love nests 30 years after they were erected, the children living in unimaginatively designed housing blocks, the Harlow residents for whom abstract sculpture simply marks a local meeting place. Along with his previous wry detachment, some of Mason’s control and elliptical wit has disappeared: the camera’s meandering over the façade of Sadler’s Wells Theatre (during a sequence on the triumphant production of _Peter Grimes_ in 1945) seems desperately random, and footage recalling Hiroshima and the Korean War is glibly used. Nevertheless, _Wot! No Art_ proves yet again what a wealth of provocative material there lies waiting to be explored in British life  and art.  
**Geoff Brown, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, April 1978**
<br><br>

**WOT! NO ART**  
_Director_: Christopher Mason  
_Production Company_:  Mason Bruce Film Associates  
_Sponsor_: Arts Council of Great Britain  
_Producer_: Christopher Mason  
_Script_: Christopher Mason  
_Photography_: Clive Tickner  
_Rostrum Photography_: Danny Boon, Hugh Gordon  
_Editor_: Polly Bindloss  
_Sound Recording_: Michael Pharey, Denis Skelton  
_Sound Re-recording_: Tony Anscombe

UK 1978  
55 mins

**REGULAR PROGRAMME**<br>
**Experimenta Mixtape: S02 E01  Curated by Onyeka Igwe**<br>
Wed 8 Jun 18:00<br>
**Behind the Scenes at the BFI: Meet the CEO**<br>
Thu 9 Jun 18:20<br>
**Silent Cinema: Miss Lulu Bett + intro by  BFI National Archive Curator Bryony Dixon**<br>
Sun 12 Jun 16:00<br>
**BFI Flare: Looking for Langston + discussion**<br>
Fri 17 Jun 18:20<br>
**Member Picks: Ball of Fire**<br>
Sat 18 Jun 15:10<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera Preview:  Moon, 66 Questions (Selini, 66 erotiseis) + Q&A with writer-director Jacqueline Lentzou**<br>
Wed 22 Jun 18:00<br>
**Terror Vision: Terror + intro with screenwriter David McGillivray and actor Tricia Walsh**<br>
Fri 24 Jun 18:00<br>
**Relaxed Screening: In Pursuit of Silence  + intro and discussion**<br>
Mon 27 Jun 18:20<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjA3NDE5MTQ0NV19
-->
