---
layout: post
title: The Babadook
published: true
date: 2022-12-15
readtime: true
categories: ['WOMAN WITH A MOVIE CAMERA']
tags: [Horror]
metadata: 'Australia-Canada 2014, 94 mins<br> Director: Jennifer Kent'
pdf: '2022-12-15-babadook.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Post-millennial horror has proven to be particularly accommodating to women directors, from the Soska Sisters, Jen and Sylvia (_Dead Hooker in a Trunk_ (2009), _American Mary_ (2012), _Rabid_ (2019)) and Ana Lily Amirpour (_A Girl Walks Home at Night_ (2014)), from Claire Denis (_Trouble Every Day_ (2001)) to Alice Lowe (_Prevenge_ (2016)), from Hélène Cattet (_Amer_ (2009), _L’étrange couleur des larmes de ton corps_ (2013), _Laissez bronzer les cadavres_ (2017)) to Coralie Fargeat (_Revenge_ (2017)). Emma Dark (_Island of the Blind Dead_ (2015), _Salient Minus Ten_ (2017)), Prano Bailey-Bond (_Man vs Sand_ (2012), _Nasty_ (2015)) and O.B. de Alessi (_The House_ (2015), _Kuo’s Eyes_ (2016)) among others have been crafting excellent short films over the past few years. Julia Ducournau’s _Raw_ caused waves when it opened in 2016 while _XX_ (2017) was an anthology horror, the work of four women writers and directors (Roxanne Benjamin, Karyn Kusama, Annie Clark and Jovanka Vuckovic). Other notable names include Karyn Kusama (_Jennifer’s Body_ (2009),  _The Invitation_ (2015)), Leigh Janiak (_Honeymoon_ (2014)), Anna Biller (_The Love Witch_ (2016)), Kerry Anne Mullaney (_The Dead Outside_ (2008)), Axelle Carolyn (_Soulmate_ (2013)), Ruth Platt (_The Lesson_ (2015)) and Kate Shenton (_Egomaniac_ (2016)).

In 2014, they were joined by Australian Jennifer Kent, a former actor who turned director after seeking advice from Lars von Trier (she assisted him on his _Dogville_ (2003)) and directed the short film _Monster_ (2005) and two episodes of the Australian horror/science fiction television anthology _Two Twisted_ (2006). _Monster_ – which Kent later referred to as ‘baby _Babadook_’ – explores some of the themes of her feature debut, featuring a young mother (Susan Prior) battling not only her own inadequacies and paranoias but also her son’s fear of a monster – which may or may not be imaginary – that he claims is living in his bedroom closet.

In _The Babadook_, the frazzled mother is played – brilliantly – by Essie Davis, a friend of Kent’s from her drama school days. Amelia Vanek is near the end of her tether – her husband was recently killed in a car accident leaving her to bring up their troubled six-year-old son Samuel (Noah Wiseman) alone. Samuel has become convinced that there’s a monster in the house and is refusing to sleep. Things take a turn for the even worse when she reads him a bedtime story, a macabre pop-up book called _Mister Babadook_ that mysteriously appears in the house and finds herself apparently haunted by the grotesque, top hat-wearing title character.

For the most part, Kent keeps things nicely vague – it’s not clear for a very long time if the Babadook is actually real, the product of Samuel’s increasingly disturbing behaviour or even a figment of Amelia’s imagination. Strange things happen around the house but how many of them are due to the supernatural and how much is due to the various mental disorders that afflict mother and son is unclear. If the film misteps, it’s when it becomes clear that the Babadook is real, removing all the traces of doubt that the early part of the film had been so careful to maintain. Unresolved grief is the real horror of  _The Babadook_, not some weird supernatural goblin – Amelia has never had the time to process the loss of her husband Oskar, who turns up in the form of actor Benjamin Winspear when the Babadook forces her to relive the fatal car crash as he drove her to hospital to give birth to Samuel. The Babadook is less a real monster than the all-consuming despair that has been eating away at Amelia since the crash.

In a sense, the Babadook is related to the rage that manifests as a pack of feral children in David Cronenberg’s _The Brood_ (1979). In both films, a mother is force to question her parental skills and in both cases their fears and anguish manifest a dangerous, diminutive force that threatens both them and the child that they no longer feel they can care for as well as they might be expected to. When the Babadook forces Amelia to relive her trauma she is finally able to conquer it, metaphorically locking it in the basement. An epilogue suggests that with their psychic trauma finally under lock and key, and with Amelia having finally confronted her repressed guilt and grief both she and Samuel are on the road to recovery – the Babadook is still a real presence in their lives but now they’re in control.

Essie Davis is the film’s most valuable player. Vulnerable, fragile, constantly on the edge of total emotional collapse, she still manages to hint at and then finally fully explore Amelia’s hidden strengths. Her sudden change in character shouldn’t work but in the capable hands of Kent and Davies it does and is, in its own disturbing way, just as frightening as the Babadook. Her transition from downtrodden, mousey shell to enraged avenger is startling but brilliantly done. Noah Wiseman has come in for some stick from some fans who found his character Samuel too annoying and even repellent, sort of missing the point that that was Kent’s intention all along. By any standards, Samuel is a horrible little brat, but it’s hardly his fault that he’s as messed up as he is and it’s testament to Amelia’s unquestioning love for the child that clings to her, frightens her and tests her already stretched patience to the limit that she can see past his presenting problems and will lay her own life on the line to protect him. The epilogue suggests that her faith in him was justified – the Babadook allows Samuel to face his inner demons too and both he and his mother appear to be heading for better lives having tamed the monster.

The Babadook itself is a nicely creepy addition to the pantheon of screen monsters. Realised with cheap and ragged but undeniably effective practical effects wherever possible, Though his _modus operandi_ is straight out of every mother’s most deep-rooted nightmare – he’s come for her child and is very likely to eat him alive – he’s a unique visual presence and a frequently unnerving one to boot. Unexpectedly, he’s become something of a gay icon after a Tumblr joke that he was openly gay. In 2017, he made his first appearance on banners and placards during marches for Pride Month.

The film was largely well received when it was released and although it was only a moderate hit in its native Australia, it did far better than expected at the North American and European box offices. The film’s commercial success was boosted immeasurably when _The Exorcist_ (1973) director William Friedkin took to Twitter to exclaim ‘I’ve never seen a more terrifying film than  THE BABADOOK. It will scare the hell out of you as it did me.’

_The Babadook_ is a film that can be enjoyed on several levels – as a straight ahead horror film, for example, or as a study of a woman on the verge of a nervous breakdown, or a tale of a dysfunctional family struggling to come to terms with their losses and adversities. And that probably explains its success. When it tries, it is genuinely scary but its most unsettling moments are the quieter ones, those exploring Amelia’s tortured psyche. Moving and frightening in equal measure it was one of the finest genre films of 2014.  
**Kevin Lyon, 26 August 2018, The Eofftv Review, eofftvreview.wordpress.com**  

**THE BABADOOK**  
_Director_: Jennifer Kent  
_©_: Babadook Films Pty Ltd, Causeway Films Pty Ltd, South Australian Film Corporation, Screen Australia  
_Production Companies_: Causeway Films, Smoking Gun Productions  
_Developed with the assistance of_: Waking Dream Productions  
_Developed with the assistance of_: Screen Australia Enterprise Program, NSW Government, Screen NSW, Binger Film Lab  
_Financed with the assistance of_: South Australian Film Corporation  
_Principal Investor_: Screen Australia Australian Government  
_Presented by_: Screen Australia, Causeway Films  
_In association with the_: South Australian Film Corporation, Smoking Gun Productions, Entertainment One  
_Executive Producers_: Jonathan Page, Michael Tear, Jan Chapman, Jeff Harrisson  
_Producers_: Kristina Ceyton, Kristian Moliere  
_Line Producer_: Julie Byrne  
_Unit Manager_: Joshua Jaeger  
_Location Manager_: Scott McDonald  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Kate Butler  
_1st Assistant Director_: Brad Lanyon  
_Casting_: Nikki Barrett  
_Written by_: Jennifer Kent  
_Director of Photography_: Radek Ladczuk  
_2nd Unit Directors of Photography_: Nima Nabili Rad, Hugh Freytag  
_Steadicam Operator_: Louis Puli  
_Stills Photographer_: Matt Nettheim  
_Special Effects Co-ordinator_: Clint Dodd  
_Editor_: Simon Njoo  
_Production Designer_: Alex Holmes  
_Art Directors_: Alex Holmes, Karen Hannaford  
_Set Decorator_: Jennifer Drake  
_Pop-up Book Illustration & Design_: Alex Juhasz  
_Make-up/Hair Supervisor_: Tracy Phillpot  
_Titles Design_: James Boorman  
_Composer_: Jed Kurzel  
_Sound Recordist_: Des Kenneally  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Pete Smith  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Reg Roordink  
_Unit Publicity_: Chris Chamberlin _Pop Culture_  

**Cast**  
Essie Davis _(Amelia)_  
Noah Wiseman _(Samuel)_  
Hayley McElhinney _(Claire)_  
Daniel Henshall _(Robbie)_  
Barbara West _(Mrs Roach)_  
Ben Winspear _(Oskar)_  
Chloe Hurn _(Ruby)_  
Jacqy Phillips _(Beverly)_  
Bridget Walters _(Norma)_  

Australia-Canada 2014  
94 mins  

**IN DREAMS ARE MONSTERS**  
**One Cut of the Dead (Kamera o tomeru na!)**  
Fri 16 Dec 18:15; Fri 30 Dec 20:45  
**The Fog**  
Fri 16 Dec 21:00; Wed 28 Dec 18:10  
**Häxan**  
Sat 17 Dec 11:45 (with live piano accompaniment)  
**The Uninvited**  
Sat 17 Dec 14:30 (+ intro by broadcaster and writer, Louise Blain)  
**Being Human + Q&A with Toby Whithouse and guests (tbc)**  
Sat 17 Dec 18:00  
**Sugar Hill**  
Sat 17 Dec 20:40  
**Black Sunday (La maschera del demonio)**  
Sun 18 Dec 18:30  
**Cat People**  
Mon 19 Dec 18:15 (+ intro by Clarisse Loughrey, chief film critic for The Independent)  
**Day of the Dead**  
Mon 19 Dec 20:40; Thu 29 Dec 18:20  
**Society**  
Tue 20 Dec 18:15; Wed 28 Dec 20:50  
**Ring (Ringu)**  
Tue 20 Dec 21:00  
**Interview with the Vampire**  
Wed 21 Dec 18:10: Thu 29 Dec 20:40  
**Ginger Snaps**  
Wed 21 Dec 20:50; Tue 27 Dec 15:10  
**Let the Right One In (Låt den rätte komma in)**  
Thu 22 Dec 18:15  
**The Lure (Córki dancing)**  
Thu 22 Dec 20:45 (+ intro by Dr Catherine Wheatley, Reader in Film Studies at King’s College London)  
**Arrebato**  
Fri 23 Dec 18:05  
**A Dark Song**  
Fri 23 Dec 20:45; Fri 30 Dec 18:20  
**Sweetheart**  
Tue 27 Dec 12:40  
**Atlantics (Atlantique) + Atlantiques**  
Tue 27 Dec 18:20  
<br>


**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
