---
layout: post
title: 12 Angry Men
published: true
date: 2022-01-03
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USA 1956, 96 mins<br> Director: Sidney Lumet'
pdf: '2022-01-03-12-angry-men.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away the plot.

Adapted by Reginald Rose from his own teleplay – in which one man’s doubts about a murder trial overcome his fellow-jurors’ prejudices – Sidney Lumet’s feature debut makes suspenseful use of a single set and claustrophobic close-ups of a superb cast. Truffaut deemed it a screenwriter’s film – ‘what an author!’ – but called Lumet ‘a director of more than ordinary gifts... We must take him seriously.’<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

Reginald Rose’s _12 Angry Men_ teleplay has transferred to film and stage many times, but Sidney Lumet’s claustrophobic movie adaptation of 1957, starring Henry Fonda as the lone voice of scepticism and compassion on a settled jury, has endured the best. Fonda brought more than just his star charisma to the piece: he acquired the film rights to Rose’s script and deferred his pay cheque so that the shoot could come in under budget. The swift, economical style of TV veteran Lumet was supplemented by striking realist cinematography from Boris Kaufman, and also by a cast who had invested time in workshopping their roles before the cameras turned.

The result is an engrossing real-time drama that thrashes out the angst and antipathies of pre-civil-rights America in a locked room. Fonda’s serene mien contrasts with the hotheads – notably Ed Begley’s raving bigot – and anxious types who surround him. The camera hangs back at first, but as the tension rises it moves in tighter, as the weather and the lighting transition from the glare of a heatwave to the darkness of a rainstorm.

These dozen adults are battling each other and their own prejudices to decide the fate of a quivering boy accused of murdering his own father. Rose often dwelt on the theme of bigotry, as far as the TV stations would allow. The teenager in question, briefly glimpsed as we follow the jury into their locked room, is Hispanic and lives in a slum, which fires a few prejudices around the table – and sympathies, too, as Jack Klugman’s Juror No 5 reveals his own past. However, the toughest nut to crack is Lee J. Cobb’s splenetic Juror No 3, paralysed by grief and rage towards his own estranged son. It’s possible to see _12 Angry Men_ as a cross-generational drama, with a child facing a jury not of his peers, but of distant, older men – reflections of his own father.<br>
**Pamela Hutchinson, _Sight and Sound_, June 2017**

**‘12 Angry Men’: a contemporary review**<br>
This film, from an original television script and directed by a new director from television, shares the same merits as some other recent, unostentatious films from the same source (_The Young Stranger_, _A Man Is Ten Feet Tall_): some highly convincing, naturalistic characterisations, a fresh look at some vivid, real-life situations and settings. Here, where the action all takes place in the jury room, the emphasis is naturally on character and the interplay of personalities. From their initial indifference to a true moral responsibility (one is anxious to get to a ball game; most have digested only the prosecutor’s analysis of the facts) they are one by one drawn into a tighter involvement, a quickened interest to discover the truth of the situation. And on the whole, the general tension and the slow breakdown of the circumstantial evidence, is excellently contrived. The acting (particularly of Martin Balsam as Juror No. 1) is easy and concise, with the exception of Lee J. Cobb’s performance as the sadist; and the last few minutes in which Cobb largely figures, represent the only lapse from the high standard elsewhere maintained. Even with this flaw, however, the film remains a compelling and outstandingly well-handled drama.<br>
**David Parkinson, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, June 1957**<br>

**12 ANGRY MEN**<br>
_Directed by:_ Sidney Lumet<br>
©: Orion, Nova, Twelve Angry Men<br>
_Produced by:_ Henry Fonda, Reginald Rose<br>
_Associate Producer:_ George Justin<br>
_Assistant Director:_ Donald Kranze<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Faith Elliott<br>
_Story and Screenplay by:_ Reginald Rose<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Boris Kaufman<br>
_Operative Cameraman:_ Saul Midwall<br>
_Film Editor:_ Carl Lerner<br>
_Art Director:_ Robert Markel<br>
_Make-up:_ Herman Buchman<br>
_Music Composed and Conducted by:_  Kenyon Hopkins<br>
_Sound:_ James A. Gleason<br>

**Cast**<br>
Henry Fonda _(Davis, eighth juror)_<br>
Lee J. Cobb _(third juror)_<br>
Ed Begley _(tenth juror)_<br>
E.G. Marshall _(fourth juror)_<br>
Jack Warden _(seventh juror)_<br>
Martin Balsam _(first juror)_<br>
John Fiedler _(second juror)_<br>
Jack Klugman _(fifth juror)_<br>
Edward Binns _(sixth juror)_<br>
Joseph Sweeney _(ninth juror)_<br>
George Voskovec _(eleventh juror)_<br>
Robert Webber _(twelfth juror)_<br>
Rudy Bond _(judge)_ *<br>
James A. Kelly _(guard)_ *<br>
Billy Nelson _(court clerk)_ *<br>
John Savoca _(defendant)_ *<br>

USA 1956©<br>
96 mins<br>

\* Uncredited<br>
<br>
**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  
<br>

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
