---
layout: post
title: Living
published: true
date: 2022-12-19
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'UK 2022, 102 mins<br> Director: Oliver Hermanus'
pdf: '2022-12-19-living.pdf'
---
_Living_ began rather serendipitously. One night, when author Kazuo Ishiguro and producer Stephen Woolley were having dinner, Bill Nighy dropped by for a drink. ‘[They] are film nerds,’ laughs Nighy of that evening. ‘They sit and exchange names of significant figures who made films, mostly in black and white, between the years of 1930 and 1957. They challenge one another to name the designer, the director and who played the policeman at the end. At the end of dinner, Ishiguro and his wife were talking amongst themselves. Then they came out of a huddle and said, “We know what your next film should be”. I said, “Well, when you feel comfortable, let me know”.’

As Woolley remembers it, Ishiguro called him soon after that dinner and said that Nighy should star in a reimagining of _Ikiru_, the Akira Kurosawa film of 1952, transposed to London at around the same era. Woolley had fond memories of the film but hadn’t watched it recently, so he screened it again, ‘and cried and loved it’, he says. He quickly saw the parallels.

‘I've been wanting somebody to make a British version of this Japanese classic _Ikiru_, which I had loved for most of my life,’ says Ishiguro. ‘I think I first saw it when I was a boy on British TV, and it had a huge impact on me. Partly because of my Japanese background, but quite regardless of that, I think I always lived my life informed by the message in that film.’ Ishiguro had long had the sense that the story could work in the UK. While _Ikiru_ had dealt with the losing side of World War II, the job of reconstruction and rebirth was similar even for the winners – and there were parallels between the countries’ sense of imperial entitlement, their stoicism and their emotional reserve. On that night at dinner, it suddenly seemed to come together.

‘Ishiguro was inspired to think of Bill for this part,’ says Woolley, ‘because Bill brings such empathy. A common emotion between people in Japan and Britain, which I think Ishiguro has found, is that they both have the same stoic restraint. Japanese society and British society are based on a lack of effusiveness. Ishiguro quite rightly thought Bill was perfect to play that kind of character. I suggested to Ishiguro that he write the script. He said he was not very good at screenwriting.’

‘I said, “You should get a proper screenwriter. Anyway, I’m writing a novel,”’ remembers Ishiguro.

Woolley managed to persuade the Nobel and Booker Prize winner that he had the necessary skills, happily. That proved invaluable in securing the rights to the film from the Kurosawa estate, who were wary but intrigued at the promise of Ishiguro’s involvement. ‘The idea of teaming up Kurosawa with Ishiguro was something they couldn’t resist, really,’ says Woolley – at least once they were convinced it was really him, after a number of handwritten notes and a video call.

In writing his adaptation, rather than being intimidated by the towering reputation of the original, Ishiguro drew a strange comfort from it. ‘All the heavy lifting had been done. It’s kind of a translation job,’ he jokes. His writing approach was daring. He screened the Kurosawa film just once, after many previous viewings earlier in his life, and then decided not to watch it again, or look at its script, as he wrote his own English take. He drew elements from memories of sharing a commuter train to London as a schoolboy in the 1960s, watching older men head into London in their identical suits and hats, to create the film’s opening scenes, and leaned on his longstanding fascination with Britain’s pre- and post-war culture. Once he had his draft in place, it was time to assemble the creative team, and bring a director aboard.

Woolley had always been keen to recruit a director from outside the UK. ‘We decided – and I felt very passionate about this – that we should look at somebody that didn’t have a preconceived idea of England. You’re always going to get a more interesting perspective. I also felt very strongly that we needed a director who had a very, very cine-literate background. The thing about Akira Kurosawa and Ishiguro is the shared love of cinema.’

The producer had seen _Moffie_, Oliver Hermanus’ 2019 war drama about gay recruits in the homophobic South African military of the 1980s, and was impressed by its sensitivity and use of resources to create a recent era. ‘A vital key with _Moffie_ is that you don’t feel you’re watching a stale period piece; you feel like you’re watching something just as relevant today. Ishiguro was also impressed, and very open to the idea of having somebody on the project who would make a movie that was cinematic and, at the same time, fresh  and new.’

After meeting the director, Woolley learned they also shared a deep appreciation of cinema greats – including Kurosawa and contemporaries like Ozu. He brought Hermanus to London to meet Film4 and Ishiguro. By the end of that meeting Hermanus knew he wanted to make the film, and he began working on the script with Ishiguro and Woolley. But he still had to reckon with the towering reputation of Akira Kurosawa’s original. ‘There was a photographic brilliance to what they were doing at that period in Japanese cinema, and every frame of _Ikiru_ is like a photograph. So that was my panic attack [moment]. I had to go, OK, I need to not imitate any of these images. I need to think of my own. It’s a fool’s errand, but it didn’t sound crazy in the end because Ishiguro was so confident about making this our own, without being in any way disrespectful to the original.’

Hermanus and Ishiguro honed and perfected the script to ready it for production over Zoom, in different countries, as the coronavirus pandemic swept the world. They’d talk for hours at a time about scenes to cut and what to add; then Ishiguro would write variations, and they’d meet and talk again. It was months before they locked their shooting script. ‘There’s a thoroughness, an intensity to Ishiguro’s genius, where nothing is left unturned,’ says Hermanus. ‘So when you get to a finished script, he’s pretty much mapped out every possible interpretation. He’s a perfectionist that way.’

Ishiguro independently describes Hermanus as a perfectionist too, so perhaps they are simply built alike. ‘I found it really enjoyable, discussing the script with Oliver and Stephen,’ says the novelist. ‘[That process] is not always enjoyable; you have to be on the same wavelength. But every time, new ideas would be generated somewhere between us. In the end, we’d have some idea that we were all excited about.’

All three are huge cinephiles, and they swapped recommendations of films from and about Britain in the 1950s, ‘so that this became a love letter to the films of that period,’ says Hermanus. He embraced the challenge of telling an English story, ‘asking every question, wondering about everything, leaving no stone unturned’ to learn everything he could about the period. ‘That’s the fun part of making films,’ he says. ‘You grow as a person through the making of it.’  
**Production notes**  

**LIVING**  
_Directed by_: Oliver Hermanus  
©: Channel Four Television Corporation, County Hall Arts,  
Number 9 Films Living Limited  
_a_ Wooley/Karlsen_,_ Number 9 _film_
_in co-production with_: Filmgate Films, Film i Väst  
_Presented by_: Film4, County Hall Arts  
_In association with_: LipSync, Rocket Science, Kurosawa Production Co  
_Executive Producers_: Norman Merry, Peter Hampden, Sean Wheelan,  
Thorsten Schumacher, Emma Berkofsky, Ko Kurosawa, Ollie Madden, Daniel Battsek, Kazuo Ishiguro, Nik Powell, Kenzo Okamoto, Ian Prior  
_Produced by_: Stephen Woolley, Elizabeth Karlsen  
_Co-producer_: Jane Hooks  
_Production Accountants_: Eddie Kane, Eddie Franklin  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Polly Duval  
_Script Supervisor_: Liz West  
_Casting Director_: Kahleen Crawford  
_Written by_: Kazuo Ishiguro  
_Based on Akira Kurosawa’s film_ Ikiru _written by_: Akira Kurosawa,  
Shinobu Hashimoto, Hideo Oguni  
_Director of Photography_: Jamie D. Ramsay  
_2nd Unit Director of Photography_: Tom Hole  
_Visual Effects_: Filmgate AB  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Steve Bowman  
_Editor_: Chris Wyatt  
_Production Designer_: Helen Scott  
_Art Director_: Andrea Stern  
_Set Decorator_: Sarah Kane  
_Costume Designer_: Sandy Powell  
_Hair and Make-up Designer_: Nadia Stacey  
_Titles by_: LipSync Design  
_Colour by_: Company 3  
_Music_: Emilie Levienaise-Farrouch  
_Music Supervisor_: Rupert Hollier  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Dylan Voigt  
_Unit Publicity_: Freud Communications

**Cast**  
Bill Nighy _(Williams)_  
Aimee Lou Wood _(Margaret Harris)_  
Alex Sharp _(Peter Wakeling)_  
Tom Burke _(Sutherland)_  
Adrian Rawlins _(Middleton)_  
Oliver Chris _(Hart)_  
Hubert Burton _(Rusbridger)_  
Zoe Boyle _(Mrs McMasters)_  
Barney Fishwick _(Michael)_  
Patsy Ferran _(Fiona)_  
Michael Cochrane _(Sir James)_  
Lia Williams _(Mrs Smith)_  
Anant Varman _(Singh)_  
Jessica Flood _(Mrs Porter)_  
Jamie Wilkes _(Talbot)_  
Richard Cunningham _(Harvey)_  
John Mackay _(Jones)_  
Ffion Jolly _(Mrs Button)_  
Celeste Dodwell _(Mrs Matthews)_  
Jonathan Keeble _(Dr Matthews)_  
Eunice Roberts _(Miss Fry)_  
Mark James _(young Michael)_  
Edward Wolstenholme _(colleague)_  
Nichola Mcauliffe _(Mrs Blake)_  
Laurie Denman _(piano man)_  
Gleanne Purcell-Brown _(barwoman)_  
Violeta Valverde _(striptease artist)_  
Michael James _(Fortnums waiter)_  
Rosie Sansom _(Mrs Johnstone)_  
Matilda Ziegler _(prim lady)_  
Grant Gillespie _(Lyons head waiter)_  
Robin Sebastian _(distinguished gentleman 1)_  
David Summer _(distinguished gentleman 2)_  
Nicky Goldie _(landlady)_  
Thomas Coombes _(police constable)_  

UK 2022©  102 mins  
Courtesy of Lionsgate  

**NEW RELEASES**  
**Lynch/Oz**  
From Fri 2 Dec  
**Bones and All**  
From Fri 2 Dec  
**Tori and Lokita**  
From Fri 9 Dec  
**Triangle of Sadness**  
From Fri 16 Dec  
**Decision to Leave**  
From Fri 16 Dec  
**The Banshees of Inisherin**  
From Fri 16 Dec  
**She Said**  
From Sat 17 Dec  
**Living**  
From Mon 19 Dec  
**Corsage**  
From Tue 27 Dec  

**RE-RELEASES**  
**Fanny and Alexander (Fanny och Alexander)**  
From Fri 2 Dec  
**The Queen of Spades**  
From Fri 23 Dec  
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
