---
layout: post
title: Go Fish
published: true
date: 2022-02-09
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama, Romance]
metadata: 'USA 1994, 83 mins<br> Director: Rose Troche'
pdf: '2022-02-09-go-fish.pdf'
---

This is a fish story about not the one that got away, but the one that got caught and won the trophy. Caught big time, in other words. But it’s also a cautionary tale, one about marketing, identity and innocence. _Go Fish_ – the movie, the trailer, the legend – wasn’t always such. It was once just like its title – derived, presumably, from the beloved children’s card game that uses ‘Go fish’ as a command, but also, more pointedly, from the corny classic sign (gone fishin’) hung on office doors throughout America when spring fever, that most uncapitalistic and anti-entrepreneurial syndrome, struck. It’s probably fitting, then, that a little, low-budget, black and white independent film with a title·signifying ‘play’ at its least hip, almost provincial best, should have evolved so immediately into a festival hit and legendary deal. This kind of success, after all, is the other kind of American fantasy. But in the process, care has to be taken that the fragile innocence and labour-of-love sincerity of the original doesn’t evaporate on its way to the bank. If this article has a hidden agenda, it’s the attempt to head off the backlash and argue that this film is far more than any mainstream distributor’s fishing expedition.

_Go Fish_ started life as a little film called _Max & Ely_. It was written in Chicago in 1991 by Rose Troche and Guinevere Turner, a couple of twenty-somethings smitten with each other and their project. It was a lesbian film, by and about and for lesbians. As Turner says, it was ‘the little film that could’. For a while, though, it couldn’t.

In 1992, Troche and Turner ran out of money. Their all-volunteer crew began to lose faith. Everybody had been working for free because they shared the dream of bringing a lesbian cinema into existence. Troche says, ‘if you don’t think that you can walk up to any lesbian and say, “hey do you want to make a film because look at the shit that’s out there?” and they’re, like, “I’m with ya”’ – well, the consequences go without saying. So when they found themselves with little money, fewer friends and a film only partly made, they sent a letter to Christine Vachon in New York. As bad as things were, there was now a lesbian producer in the US helping independent films (_Poison_, _Swoon_) to get made. And her production partner, Tom Kalin, was a Chicago boy. Vachon read the letter, saw their 20 minutes of film, read the script and signed on. They were back in business.

By 1992, John Pierson’s Islet Films came up with completion money and shooting could be finished. By 1993, ex-lovers Turner and Troche were working and playing in New York. Troche was editing the footage, Turner was fine-tuning the voiceovers, and the Sundance Film Festival would soon decide to show the film. As soon as I saw it, fine-cut on an editing table, I was enchanted and started composing catalogue copy in my head: ‘_Go Fish_ begins just about where coming-out films used to end.’ I wasn’t particularly restrained in my choice of adjectives: wistful, lyrical, seriocomic, fanciful, plus ‘an assured cinematic ability to confer grace.’

_Go Fish_ came to Park City, Utah, with high hopes and lots of fears. By the opening day, director/co-screenwriter Rose Troche and actor/co-screenwriter Guinevere Turner had arrived. A box of nail clippers to be distributed as promo hadn’t. Troche and Turner wondered if anyone would like their film in boytown – until its first screening. The crowd went nuts. ‘God, are they hot,’ said the straight women about the lesbians on screen. ‘Give her money to make another one quick,’ said the straight man about the lesbian on stage. Goldwyn made festival history by signing them to a distribution contract on opening weekend.

Then came the marketing. Unprecedented ads matched two women kissing (except that when it’s printed too dark, one looks like a man, intentionally or not) with quirky handwritten copy. Trailers were in the theatres by May, playing back-up to other big-time quality product. Then the press kicked in. Turner, her hair arranged in front of her face like a beaded curtain, had a whole page in _Interview_ touting her as a writer to watch; Rose, all pierced and intense-looking, got a pitch in _Rolling Stone_ as the hot director for 1994; the two together got the number two slot in the _New Yorker_ Talk of the Town section, which would be a major status symbol even if the writer (anonymous, as is customary for Talk contributors, even when Jacqueline Kennedy wrote an item) hadn’t gone on and on about what a good flirt Turner is and how much all the adulation was pleasing Troche and, well, how charmingly full of themselves and hand-rolled cigarettes and beautiful women and Café Tabac these two were. It’s unprecedented respect for a lesbian movie. And bear in mind that _Go Fish_ hadn’t even opened.

Go Fish, then, offers up a lovely fable: the little film that is saved from extinction, hits the bull’s-eye and is swept into the marketplace leaving its hardcore fans to worry that the hype might backfire, that the innocence and fervour that are the film’s finest qualities will be mistaken for mere artifice once the context changes.

Today, there’s a locomotion to lesbian and gay film work that’s undeniable. Two years into the ‘New Queer Cinema’, film and video are still taking off, driven by the fuel of political passion and aesthetic urgency. The queers have staked out this historical moment, making sure it doesn’t erode. And the new filmmakers and video artisans are producing their work without compromising stylistic rigour. Who can resist, when there’s a huge audience willing and waiting to respond to less traditional work? There’s nothing like a political movement to make artists responsive and interactive and full of mandates, while audiences full of their own sense of empowerment can be counted on to swell the ranks of the ticket line and bring their own serious demands to the screening (and, sometimes even to the filmmakers themselves).

Finally, critically, not incidentally, a lesbian feature cinema is emerging alongside lesbian video. After years of boys-only filmmaking, _Go Fish_ is a lesbian dramatic film to cheer. It’s the flagship for a season already sporting Shu Lea Cheang’s new _Fresh Kill_ and Midi Onodera’s just completed _Sadness of the Moon_. If the papers are to be believed, there are already more than a dozen mainstream lesbian films in production or pre-production in Hollywood. If this keeps up, then the 90s may just be the decade of the dyke after all.  
**B. Ruby Rich, _Sight and Sound_, July 1994**
<br><br>

**GO FISH**  
_Director_: Rose Troche  
_Production Companies_: Can I Watch Pictures, Islet  
_In association with_: KVPI  
_Executive Producers_: Tom Kalin, Christine Vachon  
_Producers_: Rose Troche, Guinevere Turner  
_Associate Producer_: V.S. Brodie  
_Production Assistants_: Rick Powell, Joanne Morton  
_Assistant Director_: Wendy Quinn  
_Continuity_: Rick Powell, Lisa Raymond  
_Screenplay_: Guinevere Turner, Rose Troche  
_Director of Photography_: Ann T. Rossetti  
_Additional Camera_: Jane Jefferies, Rose Troche, Joe Vidal  
_Lighting Directors_: Ann T. Rossetti, Arthur C. Stone  
_Assistant Camera_: Kelly Krotine, Joe Vidal,  Mimi Wadell  
_Gaffer_: Joy Castro-Nova  
_Additional Lighting_: Maida Sussman, Elspeth Kydd  
_Grips_: Debbie Snead, Sara Varon,  Rebecca McBride, Jan Collins, Walter Youngblood, Tracy Kimme, Oscar Cervera, Joanne Morton, Joanna Brown, Scout, Paul Shabaz,  Kevin M. Grubb, Jennifer Allen, JoAnne Willis  
_Editor_: Rose Troche  
_Assistant Editors_: Lisa Hubbard, Jesse Weiner  
_Titles Created by_: Guinevere Turner  
_Optical Effects_: Rose Troche  
_Opticals_: Millenium  
_Music_: Brendan Dolan, Jennifer Sharpe  
_Additional Music_: Scott Aldrich  
_Additional Guitar for Score_: Mark Huston  
_Musician (Drums)_: Alexi Hawley  
_Musician (Violin)_: Tony Cross  
_Musician (Bass)_: More Paladini  
_Musician (Vocals/Acoustic Guitar)_: Mila Drumke  
_Musician (Acoustic Guitar/Slide Guitar)_:  Jennifer Sharpe  
_Sound Recording_: Lisa Hubbard, Elspeth Kydd  
_Additional Sound_: Joe Vidal, Walter Youngblood  
_Assistant Sound_: Joe Vidal, Walter Youngblood  
_Boom Operators_: Jennifer Allen, Theresa Castino, Lisa Gillespie, Kerry Hilgar, Mary Elva Kouklis,  Jean Kracher, Julia Lafleur, Diane Swanson,  Walter Youngblood  
_Re-recording Engineer_: David Novack  
_Sound Editor_: Missy Cohen  
_Dialogue Editor_: Jacob Ribicoff  
_Assistant Dialogue Editors_: Gillian Chi,  Karl Wasserman  
_ADR Engineers_: George Lara, David Novack  
_Foley Artist_: Brian Vancho  
_Foley Engineer_: George Lara

**Cast**  
V.S. Brodie _(Ely)_  
Guinevere Turner _(‘Max’ Kebrina West)_  
T. Wendy McMillan _(Kia)_  
Migdalia Melendez _(Evy)_  
Anastasia Sharp _(Daria)_  
Mary Garvey _(student 1/jury member)_  
Jennifer Allen _(student 2)_  
Walter Youngblood _(student 3)_  
Danielia Falcón _(student 3/jury member)_  
Arthur C. Stone _(student 4)_  
Elspeth Kydd _(angry student)_  
Tracy Kimme _(student 5/jury member)_  
Brooke Webster _(Mel)_  
Mimi Wadell _(Mimi)_  
Scout _(hairdresser)_  
Susan Gregson _(bride 1/jury member)_  
Carolyn Kotlarski _(bride 2/jury member)_  
Joanna Brown _(bride 3/jury member)_  
Betty Jeannie Pejko _(Evy’s mother)_  
Alfredo Troche _(Junior)_  
JoAnne C. Willis _(Sam)_  
Jonathan T. Vincent _(the boy)_  
Jamika Ajalon _(jury member 1)_  
Michele Cullom _(jury member 2)_  
Marianna _(herself)_  
Shelly Schneider-Bello _(Bella)_  
Stephanie Boles _(Alice)_  
Julia Lafleur _(Andy)_  
Lisa Raymond _(dinner guest 1)_  
Nina Von Voss _(dinner guest 2)_  
Dorothea Reichenbacher _(Della)_  
Rose Troche _(woman in wedding dream)_

USA 1994  
83 mins
<br><br>

**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar**<br>
Tue 1 Feb 18:20; Fri 25 Feb 20:45<br>
**Young Soul Rebels**<br>
Wed 2 Feb 18:20 (+ intro by BFI Race Equality Lead Rico Johnson-Sinclair); Thu 17 Feb 20:45<br>
**All About My Mother (Todo sobre mi madre)**<br>
Wed 2 Feb 20:45; Wed 16 Feb 21:00<br>
**Beautiful Thing**<br>
Thu 3 Feb 20:45; Mon 14 Feb 20:30<br>
**The Handmaiden (Ah-ga-ssi)**<br>
Fri 4 Feb 17:50; Sat 12 Feb 20:10; Sun 27 Feb 17:50<br>
**Rent**<br>
Sat 5 Feb 12:30; Sun 20 Feb 18:10<br>
**Maurice**<br>
Sun 6 Feb 15:20; Mon 14 Feb 18:00<br>
**The Watermelon Woman**<br>
Mon 7 Feb 20:45; Sat 26 Feb 20:30<br>
**Happy Together (Chun gwong cha sit)**<br>
Tue 8 Feb 18:15 (+ intro by Yi Wang, Queer East); Sun 13 Feb 15:20<br>
**My Own Private Idaho**<br>
Tue 8 Feb 20:45; Wed 23 Feb 18:00 (+ intro by BFI Race Equality Lead Rico Johnson-Sinclair)<br>
**Brokeback Mountain**<br>
Wed 9 Feb 17:45 (+ intro by BFI Race Equality Lead Rico Johnson-Sinclair); Mon 21 Feb 20:25<br>
**Go Fish**<br>
Wed 9 Feb 20:40; Sat 26 Feb 18:20<br>
**Rope**<br>
Thu 10 Feb 18:30; Tue 22 Feb 14:30<br>
**Victim**<br>
Thu 10 Feb 20:40; Sun 13 Feb 13:00; Mon 21 Feb 18:00<br>
**Desert Hearts**<br>
Fri 11 Feb 20:40; Wed 16 Feb 18:20 (+ intro by BFI Head Librarian Emma Smart)<br>
**My Beautiful Laundrette**<br>
Sat 12 Feb 18:20; Tue 15 Feb 20:45; Sat 19 Feb 20:45<br>
**A Fantastic Woman (Una mujer fantástica)**<br>
Sun 13 Feb 18:40; Tue 22 Feb 20:50<br>
**Mädchen in Uniform**<br>
Fri 18 Feb 20:30; Sat 26 Feb 16:00<br>
**Moonlight**<br>
Thu 24 Feb 14:30; Mon 28 Feb 20:45<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5NDQ2NzczODFdfQ==
-->
