---
layout: post
title: Who Needs Channel 4?<br>with Channel 4 Chief Content Officer Ian Katz
published: true
date: 2022-09-28
readtime: true
categories: ['CHANNEL 4<br>40 YEARS OF REVOLUTION']
tags: [Television, Talks]
metadata: 
pdf: '2022-09-28-who-needs-c4.pdf'
---

**Special guests include: BAFTA-winner Nida Manzoor (_We Are Lady Parts_), TV presenter Yinka Bokinni (_Unapologetic_, _How to Hire a Hit Man_), comedian Rosie Jones (_Trip Hazard_), and satirist Munya Chawawa (_Complaints Welcome_).**

The world Channel 4 was born into 40 years ago was very different to today’s: only two UK broadcasters, whole swathes of society unrepresented on the TV screen, precious little edgy or challenging programming. So, in a world of limitless viewer choice, vastly improved on-screen representation, and both streamers and broadcasters offering more challenging and innovative content, what is the role of Channel 4 now? Can it still be a trailblazer and troublemaker over the next 40 years? Chief Content Officer Ian Katz discusses how the DNA created in 1982 still shapes the channel’s output while a panel of stars who have emerged through the modern Channel 4 talk about the role it has played in their careers. There will also be the chance to ask your own questions.

**Ian Katz** is Chief Content Officer of Channel 4. Ian has overall responsibility for the creative output across Channel 4, its portfolio and All 4, leading the creative commissioning team to ensure Channel 4’s unique remit to innovate, take creative risks and represent all of the UK on screen is reflected in its programmes and content. Under his leadership, award-winning output includes _It’s a Sin_; _For Sama_; _Derry Girls_; _Help_; _Stath Lets Flats_; _This Way Up_; _We Are Lady Parts_; _Joe Lycett’s Got Your Back_; _Jeremy Kyle: Death on Daytime_. Ian has led Channel 4’s digital-first commissioning strategy which has seen viewing to Channel 4’s On Demand platform increase by more than 20% over each of the last two years. Before joining Channel 4 in 2018, Ian was editor of BBC’s _Newsnight_, a role he took up after 23 years as a newspaper journalist, including serving as Deputy Editor and Head of News at  _The Guardian_.

**Nida Manzoor** is an award-winning genre-comedy writer and director across film and television. Best known for creating, directing and writing the Channel 4 comedy series _We Are Lady Parts_, Manzoor has received multiple accolades including the BAFTA for Best TV Comedy Writing 2022. Manzoor began her film career working as a runner and made her directing debut on the first series of BBC Three’s _Enterprice_ in 2018 and was subsequently awarded a RTS Craft & Design Award for Best Director (Comedy Drama). Following this, in 2019 she directed two episodes of _Doctor Who_. Manzoor has recently wrapped production on her debut feature film _Polite Society_, with Working Title and Focus Features. The film is an action-comedy which follows a bolshy schoolgirl and martial artist-in-training who dreams of becoming a world-renowned stuntwoman.

A South London native with a law degree, **Yinka Bokinni**’s love for music lead her to a dream slot, The Capital Xtra Breakfast Show 6-10am. From radio to TV, Yinka presented 4music’s monthly ‘Fresh’ series for two years. Beyond her passion for music, is film. Yinka is the live red-carpet host for the BIFA Awards, interviewing A-list actors regarding award-nominated work. You will also find her hosting at screenings and for big movie premieres, most recently for _King Richard_, _The Batman_ and _Fantastic_ _Beasts_. Yinka is a True Crime addict which is proven through her popular _True Crime Anniversary_ YouTube series. Merging this with her impressive presenting skills, led to the project of _True Crime Unravelled_, a Channel 4 original digital series which launched in October 2021. Yinka is an award-winning documentary presenter, winning a prestigious RTS and Grierson Award for her first groundbreaking Channel 4 documentary _Damilola: The Boy Next Door_. 2022 is an exciting year as more documentaries are scheduled to air, including _Naked Education_ and another which is yet to be announced. Her documentary _How to Hire a Hit Man_ aired in June and her first Channel 4 dispatches documentary _Inside the Metaverse: Are You Safe?_ aired in April and went viral. Fulfilling a lifelong goal, Yinka now hosts her own weekly late night talk show, _Unapologetic_, on Channel 4 with co-host ZeZe Mills.

**Rosie Jones** has quickly become a must-see act on the UK comedy circuit, having starred on hit shows such as _Live at the Apollo_, _The Jonathan_ _Ross_ _Show_, _8 Out of 10 Cats_, _Cats Does Countdown_, _The Last Leg_, _Joe Lycett’s_ _Got Your Back_, _Mock the Week_, _Hypothetical_, _The Ranganation_, _Jon_ _Richardson’s Channel Hopping_, _Dating No Filter_ and _The Last Leg Tokyo_ as well as fronting two travelogue series for Channel 4 – _Mission: Accessible_ and _Trip Hazard_, both recommissioned for second series. Rosie has completed two sell-out runs at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe with _Fifteen_ _Minutes_ and _Backward_ receiving critical acclaim, the _Scotsman_ describing her show as ‘both elegantly crafted and mischievous to its bones’. The last 12 months have seen Rosie sign a two-book deal with Hachette Children’s Group. The first book, _The Amazing Edie Eckhart_ was published in August 2021, and is a brand new upper middle-grade series written with humour and heart in diary form, which Jacqueline Wilson dubbed a ‘brilliant book – fresh, funny and ultra-cool’. The second in the series, _The Amazing Edie Eckhart: The Big Trip_, is due for release in August 2022.

**Munya Chawawa** is one of the most exciting comedic entertainers to emerge from the social space in recent years. So far in 2022, Munya has won the RTS Award for Best Presenter, the award for Best Breakthrough Comedian at The National Comedy Awards, and his show _Race Around Britain_ is BAFTA nominated. Munya can most recently be seen in the critically acclaimed _Mood_ for the BBC and will next be seen in Netflix’s hotly anticipated adaptation of _The Sandman_. Munya is perhaps best known for his satirical humour, rapid reactive commentary, and roster of original personalities across social media. He has also written for Charlie Brooker’s _Death to 2020_ and _Motherf**cking Pep Talk_ for Comedy Central.
<br><br>

**CHANNEL 4  
40 YEARS OF REVOLUTION**<br>
**Music & Youth: The Tube + Discussion & Q&A**<br>
Fri 2 Sep 18:20<br>
**Comedy: Discussion & Q&A + The Comic Strip Presents: Five Go Mad in Dorset**<br>
Tue 6 Sep 18:15<br>
**Channel 4’s TV Drama Revolution:  Discussion + Q&A**<br>
Sun 11 Sep 14:15<br>
**A Very British Coup + intro by  author Chris Mullin**<br>
Sun 11 Sep 16:30<br>
**Diversity: Handsworth Songs + Q&A with  John Akomfrah + Panel Discussion & Q&A**<br>
Mon 12 Sep 18:15<br>
**Out and Proud: Veronica 4 Rose  + Out on Tuesday + intro by original  
Channel 4 Commissioner Caroline Spry**<br>
Thu 15 Sep 18:15<br>
**Access / Direct Speech: The Work They Say  Is Mine + Women of the Rhondda  + Face of Our Fear**<br>
Tue 20 Sep 18:15<br>
**Channel 4: The Television Revolution**<br>
Fri 23 Sep 18:20<br>
**Controversy: Jesus the Evidence + V  + Mother Ireland**<br>
Sat 24 Sep 18:00<br>
**Who Needs Channel 4?**<br>
Wed 28 Sep 18:20<br>
**Channel 4 Then and Now conference**<br>
Fri 23 Sep 10:00–17:00 and Sat 24 Sep  10:00–17:00<br>

Regional screenings and events will be taking place at these venues across the UK (please go to **bfi.org.uk/whatson** for links): Arnolfini, Bristol; Filmhouse Edinburgh; Queen’s Film Theatre, Belfast; Y Drwm, National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth

Explore thousands of titles from across  Channel 4’s history in our free Mediatheque<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE0OTAwMjM5OV19
-->
