---
layout: post
title: 42nd Street
published: true
date: 2022-03-02
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Musical]
metadata: 'USA 1933, 90 mins<br> Director: Lloyd Bacon'
pdf: '2022-03-02-42nd-Street.pdf'
---

_Introduced by Miles Eady, BFI Cinemas and Events (Wednesday 2 March)_

‘Naughty, bawdy, gaudy, sporty’, _42nd Street_ is a prime chunk of fantasy real-estate – not just a movie, but a novel, a song, a play, an act, an attitude, a dream, a racket, a rhythm, a way of life.

_42nd Street_ is the hectic intersection where industrial folklore crosses show business myth. It’s the tale of how America licked the Depression, how the Warner Brothers elected Franklin Roosevelt, and how Hollywood got to out-sing, out-dance, and out-entertain Broadway. Indeed, America’s pre-eminent theatrical strip, the thoroughfare in ‘the heart of little old New York’ that gives _42nd Street_ its name, was well in decline on 9 March 1933 when the movie’s theme first blared out and its iconic title filled the screen at the Strand Theatre, five blocks away.

Times Square, where 42nd Street crosses Broadway, had once been the best-lit stage in American culture. But as burlesque, vaudeville and second-run movies replaced legitimate shows, _Variety_ declared that the ‘gayest, white wayest and most expensive nite life street in the world’ had turned ‘cut-rate’.  It was as though the street predicted its own democratisation – or should we say, Warnerisation. For even before the studio produced _42nd Street_, Warner Bros was the celebrant of that particular turf, the purveyor of brash, racy, cynical, up-to-date movies populated by fast-talking wiseguys – shysters and news-hounds, racketeers and their molls.

_42nd Street_ ‘has the lean, hungry, underlit look of Warners’ films of the same era,’ writes Rocco Fumento in his introduction to the 1980 publication of the movie’s screenplay. The sets are threadbare, the costumes look to be strictly off-the-rack. Even the musical extravaganzas seem frugal: ‘The “Young and Healthy” number has a lot of chorus boys and girls but no setting whatsoever except for three revolving platforms.’ But that squadron of chorines and those motorised platforms tell all: _42nd Street_ is the Times Square of the assembly line.

This is a street movie where there are almost no street scenes – and then they are mainly rear-projected stock shots as seen from a stage door or a taxi window. The street here is a state of mind. The stage in _42nd Street_ is the distillation of the street, the spectacle is the making of the show, and the show itself is a model metropolis – the nexus of glamorous display, fantastic abundance, and utopian social order.

_42nd Street_ is inextricably bound up in the experience of the Depression and the coming of the New Deal. Its production spans the 1932 Presidential election campaign and its release – together with that of _The Gold Diggers of 1933_, which opened in Los Angeles and New York the very week that Congress passed the National Recovery Act – coincided almost exactly with the celebrated ‘first hundred days’ of the Roosevelt administration. (The only other film so spectacularly to embody the popular mood was Disney’s animated short _The Three Little Pigs_ which, released a few days before _Gold Diggers_, provided an even catchier anti-Depression than ‘We’re in the Money’, with ‘Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?’) Thus _42nd Street_ is one of a handful of Hollywood movies which not only reflect but _are_ American social history – films that might include _Casablanca_, the original _Invasion of the Body Snatchers_, _Bonnie and Clyde_, _Rocky_ and _Ghostbusters_.

On the one hand, _42nd Street_ is a Horatio Alger story as refracted through the _Ziegfeld Follies_: the virtuous Peggy Sawyer works hard, resists temptation, gets her break, and makes the most of it. On the other hand, the film offers the vision of some new, collective social order, founded on the industrial production of erotic fantasy, the joyous orchestration of the masses, the confusion between making love and making work. Even more than most musicals, _42nd Street_ presents ‘head-on’, as Richard Dyer suggests in his essay on the use-value of entertainment, just ‘what utopia would feel like’.

For the movie’s reviewers and audiences, _42nd Street_ more than lived up to its publicity, even though most commentators deemed the premise overfamiliar. _42nd Street_, wrote _The_ _New York Times_, was ‘the liveliest and one of the most tuneful screen musical comedies that has come out of Hollywood.’ The _New York Herald Tribune_ found it ‘brisk and alert’, particularly in comparison to the previous glut of backstage movies. Hearst’s _New York American_ thought _42nd Street_ brought ‘musicals back with a great big bang’, reporting that the opening night crowd applauded the dance numbers. The _New York World-Telegram_ felt the movie ‘too lavish, perhaps’ but the _Daily News_ correctly predicted ‘a box-office smash’. In any case, the New Deal in Entertainment had arrived. Echoing the radio-broadcast ‘fireside chat’ which the new President delivered on 12 March, Warners took an ad in _Variety_ to announce that ‘America’s Pocketbook is Open for Business. No Shutdown – No Letdown – but a SHOWDOWN in the war against depression. Whether you’re a Democrat or a Republican you’ll endorse – WARNER BROS’ 10-WEEK RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM.’

The week that _42nd Street_ opened in New York, the Hollywood studios, led by MGM, initiated a temporary 50 per cent pay cut for all salaried employees. Zanuck, who had his own salary slashed, opposed the reductions and attempted to rescind them. Not only was he overruled, but Harry Warner threatened to extend the cuts beyond the initial eight-week period. ‘Furious and shaken,’ historian Thomas Schatz writes, Zanuck ‘conducted studio business with an air of detachment and was all but oblivious to the tremendous impact of _42nd Street_.’ On 15 April, he resigned.

Hence the appropriateness of the morose _42nd Street_ coda: a crowd in evening clothes leaves the theatre, bizarrely complaining that Julian Marsh is taking unjustified credit for the discovery of that new sensation, Peggy Sawyer. Marsh stands off to the side unrecognised, listening ironically and holding his stomach, the ubiquitous cigarette dangling from his lips. As the show-within-the-show ended with Sawyer and her consort on top of the world, the ‘real’ show concludes with the lonely stage director sitting on the bottom rung of a fire-escape in a dark alley.

Before the fade-out there are a few wistful bars of Brock’s theme, as if to suggest that the former silent stars, Baxter and Daniels, are being supplanted by the ‘Young and Healthy’ Keeler and Powell. It’s a distinctly downbeat close – but then the whole finale is a kind of fantastic wish fulfilment. Peggy Sawyer may have flattened the Empire State, but the show itself is still in Philadelphia.<br>
**J. Hoberman, _42nd Street_ (BFI Film Classics, 1993). Reproduced by kind permission of Bloomsbury Publishing. ©J.Hoberman**<br>

**42ND STREET**<br>
_Directed by_: Lloyd Bacon  
_Production Companies_: Warner Bros., Vitaphone Corporation  
_Screen Play by_: Rian James, James Seymour  
_Based on the novel by_: Bradford Ropes  
_Photography by_: Sol Polito  
_Edited by_: Thomas Pratt, Frank Ware  
_Art Director_: Jack Okey  
_Gowns by_: Orry-Kelly  
_Silks by_: Cheney Brothers  
_Words & Music by_: Al Dubin, Harry Warren  
_Music Performed by_: Vitaphone Orchestra  
_Vitaphone Orchestra Conducted by_: Leo F. Forbstein  
_Dances & Ensembles Created & Staged by_: Busby Berkeley<br>

_uncredited_<br>
_Producer_: Darryl F. Zanuck  
_Supervisor_: Hal B. Wallis  
_2nd Unit Director_: Ray Enright  
_Assistant Director_: Gordon Hollingshead  
_Screenplay_: Whitney Bolton  
_Additional Photography_: Byron Haskin, Dev Jennings  
_2nd Unit Director of Photography_: James Van Trees  
_Director of Photography of Trailer_: Arthur Todd  
_Camera Operators_: Thomas Brannigan, Conway Davis, Kenneth Green, Michael Joyce, David Kesson, H.F. Koenekamp, William Schurr, Richard Towers, Rex Wimpy  
_Assistant Cameramen_: Archie Anderson, I.G. Burks, John Crouse, Louis De Angelis, Perry Finnerman, Carl Guthrie, Jack Koffman, J.M. Larson, R.G. Mitchell, Fred Terzo, William Whitley  
_Chief Electrician_: George Whittemore  
_Chief Grip_: Harold Noyes  
_Stills_: George Baxter, John Ellis, George Hommel, Buddy Longworth, Charles S. Welborn  
_Sound_: Nathan Levinson, Dolph Thomas  
_General Press Agent_: S. Charles Einfeld<br>

**Cast**<br>
Warner Baxter _(Julian Marsh)_  
Bebe Daniels _(Dorothy Brock)_  
George Brent _(Pat Denning)_  
Ruby Keeler _(Peggy Sawyer)_  
Guy Kibbee _(Abner Dillon)_  
Una Merkel _(Lorraine ‘Lolly’ Fleming)_  
Ginger Rogers _(Ann ‘Anytime Annie’ Lowell)_  
Ned Sparks _(Thomas Barry)_  
Dick Powell _(Billy Lawler)_  
Allen Jenkins _(MacElroy)_  
Edward J. Nugent _(Terry Neil)_  
Robert McWade _(Al Jones)_  
George E. Stone _(Andy Lee)_<br>

_uncredited_<br>
Milton Kibbee _(news spreader)_  
Wallis Clark _(Dr Chadwick)_  
Charles Lane _(author)_  
Harry Akst _(Jerry, the pianist)_  
Dave O’Brien _(chorus boy)_  
Al Dubin ,Harry Warren _(song writers)_  
Tom Kennedy _(Slim Murphy, another thug)_  
Jack La Rue _(thug)_  
Henry B. Walthall _(old actor)_  
Louise Beavers _(Pansy, the maid)_  
George Irving _(house doctor)_  
Clarence Nordstrom _(groom, ‘Shuffle off to Buffalo’ number)_  
Toby Wing _(showgirl in ‘Young and Healthy’ number)_  
Rolfe Sedan _(stage aide)_  
Patricia Ellis _(secretary)_  
Harry Seymour _(aide)_  
Kermit Maynard _(dancer)_  
Virginia Albertson, Loretta Andrews, Alice Arnold, Betty Bassette, Adrian Brier, Lynn Browning, Edna Callaghan, Maxine Cantway, Margaret Carthew, Mildred Claire, Dorothy Coonan, Hazel Craven, Sue Curtis, Alice Dahl, May Daly, Patsy Daly, Irma Dane, Dallas Dexter, Joan Dix, Mildred Dixon, Ruth Eddings, Kay English, Patricia Farnum, Gloria Fayth, Vina Gale, Sugar Geise, Virginia George, June Glory, Bernice Graves, Harriette Haddon, Sally L. Haines, Mary Jane Halsey, Ann Hovey, Peaches Jackson, Ruth Jennings, Adele Lacy, Margaret Lamarr, Skeeter Lamarr, Rose Lane, Patsy Lee, Laura Morse, Nancy Nash, Nita Pike, Sue Rainey, Sandra Rambeau, Betty Recklaw, Donna Mae Roberts, Barbara Rogers, Jane Shadduck, Bee Stephens, Alice Stombs, Virginia Thomas, Dorothy White, Renée Whitney, Emily Williams, Pat Wing, Evelyn Wise _(chorus)_<br>

USA 1933<br>
90 mins<br>

**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**Le Mépris (Contempt)**<br>
Tue 1 Mar 18:15; Tue 8 Mar 20:50; Sat 12 Mar 20:50<br>
**42nd Street**<br>
Wed 2 Mar 18:00 (+ intro by Miles Eady, BFI Cinema and Events); Fri 4 Mar 20:40; Mon 14 Mar 20:45<br>
**Cabaret**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 20:40; Sat 12 Mar 18:15<br>
**8 1/2 (Otto e mezzo)**<br> 
Fri 4 Mar 18:00; Mon 7 Mar 20:15; Wed 16 Mar 17:50 (+ intro by Giulia Saccogna,  BFI Programme & Research Coordinator)<br>
**F for Fake**<br>
Fri 4 Mar 20:50; Wed 9 Mar 18:10 (+ Intro by Programmer-At-Large, Geoff Andrew); Wed 16 Mar 21:10<br>
**Nashville**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 19:45; Wed 9 Mar 14:15; Sun 13 Mar 18:00<br>
**Les Demoiselles de Rochefort  (The Young Ladies of Rochefort)**<br>
Sun 6 Mar 13:15; Fri 11 Mar 18:05; Tue 15 Mar 18:10<br>
**Baadasssss!**<br>
Thu 10 Mar 20:40; Sat 12 Mar 18:10<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
