---
layout: post
title: The Piano
published: true
date: 2022-07-14
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama, Period]
metadata: 'Australia/France 1992, 121 mins<br> Director: Jane Campion'
pdf: '2022-07-14-piano.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Long before _The Power of the Dog_, Campion explored the relationship between sexuality and power with this Palme d’Or-winning tale of a woman, mysteriously mute, arriving with her daughter for an arranged marriage in 19th-century New Zealand, and getting caught up in a strange arrangement with her husband’s neighbour. The titular musical instrument is both bargaining tool and an outlet for private passions.  
**bfi.org.uk**  

For a while I could not think, let alone write, about _The Piano_ without shaking. Precipitating a flood of feelings, _The Piano_ demands as much a physical and emotional response as an intellectual one. As with the Maoris in the film who, believing the Bluebeard shadow play to be real, attempt to stop the old duke add another wife to his collection, I wanted to rush at the screen and shout and scream. Not since the early days of cinema, when audiences trampled over each other towards the exit to avoid the train emerging from the screen, could I imagine the medium of film to be so powerful. Like Ada’s piano music, which is described as ‘a mood that passes through you… a sound that creeps into you’, this is cinema that fills every sense. The opening shot of delicate pink skin smoothed over the screen, as fingers hide eyes, suggests the membrane that the audience must burst through to make the painful and traumatic trek into the film’s dark, gnarled woods, finally to be released in the watery death/birth of an ending. Moving pictures indeed.

A film about silence and expression beyond language, _The Piano_ resonates with the silences embedded deep in the texts of such 19th-century women writers as Emily Brontë or Emily Dickinson, women who hid scraps of their work under blotters, who hid themselves behind pseudonyms. They, like the strident composer Ada, were told that their creations were most irregular. In _The Piano_, Jane Campion feels her way around those echoing caves upon which they built their haunted houses of fiction. It is a virtuoso interpretation of that literary sensibility in a cinematic form, truer than any doggedly faithful adaptation of, say, _Wuthering Heights_. Indeed, _The Piano_ puts us in the grip of the repressions of the 19th century – an era which saw polite society sheathing the ankles of piano legs with special socks in case they gave young men ideas. Such is the erotic object at the heart of the film.

Campion is playful with the period’s more bizarre neuroses. The film flashes with moments of indignant humour, such as when Flora is ordered to whitewash some trees after she and her young friends are caught rubbing up against them in a playful – and unwitting – imitation of the sexual act. But Campion is careful not to let the comedy take hold. Under less thoughtful direction Stewart could have been the buffoonish patriarch, hauling his white man’s burden behind him. He treats the Maoris like children, paying them in buttons and staking out his territory over their sacred burial grounds. After the shocking punishment he metes out to Ada, he informs her, ‘I only clipped your wings.’ He is, as one Maori dubs him, an emotionally shrivelled ‘old dry balls.’ Yet this awful paterfamilias is invested with some sympathy. He is a confused man, who attempts to guy his world down in the chaos of change, who wants his music – and his sex – played to a strict time, so fearful is he of the other rhythms that might move him. If only he could listen, like Ada’s previous lover and the father of Flora, upon whom she could ‘lay thoughts on his mind like a sheet.’ It is the communication of the gentle caress, the smoothing of nimble fingers over sheets and scales.

Conventional language imprisons Ada like the crinoline, which ambiguously also marks out her private, silent space (the skirt provides an intimate tent for Ada and Flora to shelter in the beach). Crucially, it is the written word that finally betrays her as she sends her love note to Baines, who cannot read but who knows the languages of those around him. Her arrangement with Baines has previously been based on a sensuous play of touch, smell and sound.

Bodies become instruments of expression, while the piano smelling of scent and salt becomes corporeal. Baines’ massaging of Ada’s leg through a hole in her black worsted stocking is given the same erotic charge as her fingering of the scales. After such libidinous exchange, the marking down of her feelings for him with words only brings destruction, which is hastened by Flora, Ada’s little echoing mouthpiece (who is also the most compulsive and intriguing of fabulists).

What to make, then, of Ada’s sudden plunge after her lifeless piano, which can no longer sing, into the watery grave? Ada’s bid to enter into the order of language brings only death. Her will moves her finally to wave, not drown, to take life.

But there is the disquieting shadow of death cast on to the coda of the film. Brighter than in any of the previous scenes, she is seen in mourning grey, her head covered in a black-edged veil, tapping out notes with the silver artificial finger, which now marks her as the town freak. She is learning to speak but her voice rings the knell ‘death, death, death’. At night she dreams of her husk, anchored to the piano, skirts billowing out like a balloon, floating in the silence of the deep, deep sea. Impossible to shake off, it is the final image in a film that weighs heavy on the heart and mind, that drags us down into our own shuddering silence.  
**Lizzie Francke, _Sight and Sound_, November 1993**  

**Jane Campion on ‘The Piano’**  
I feel a kinship between the kind of romance that Emily Brontë portrays in _Wuthering Heights_ and this film. Hers is not the notion of romance we’ve come to use; it’s very harsh and extreme, a gothic exploration of the romantic impulse. I wanted to respond to these ideas in my own century. My not writing in Brontë’s time means that I can look at a side of the relationship that she could not develop. My exploration can be a lot more sexual, a lot more investigative of the power of eroticism. Then you get involved in actual bodyscape as well, because the body has certain effects – like a drug almost – certain desires for erotic satisfaction which are very strong forces.

I have enjoyed writing characters who don’t have a twentieth-century sensibility about sex. We’ve grown up with so many expectations that the erotic impulse is almost lost to us, but these characters have nothing to prepare them for its strength and power. I think the romantic impulse is in all of us and sometimes we live it for a short time, but it’s not part of a sensible way of living. It’s a heroic path and generally ends dangerously. I treasure it and believe it’s a path of great courage. It can also be a path of the foolhardy and the compulsive.  
**Jane Campion, _Sight & Sound_, October 1993**  

**THE PIANO**  
_Directed by_: Jane Campion  
_©_: Jan Chapman Productions, CiBy 2000  
_A_ Jan Chapman _production_  
_Presented by_: CiBy 2000, Australian Film Commission  
_Developed with the assistance of_:
New South Wales Film and Television Office  
_Executive Producer for CiBy 2000_: Alain Depardieu  
_Producer_: Jan Chapman  
_Associate Producer_: Mark Turnbull  
_Unit Manager_: John Wilson  
_Production Manager_: Chloe Smith  
_Production Accountants_: Keith Mackenzie, Anna McMurtry  
_Location Manager_: Sally Sherratt  
_Post-production Supervisors_: Stephen O’Rourke, Anne Berriman, Lynn-Maree Danzey  
_Research_: Colin Englert, Peter Long  
_2nd Unit Director/Media Kit Director_: Colin Englert  
_1st Assistant Director_: Mark Turnbull  
_Continuity_: Lynn-Maree Danzey  
_New Zealand Casting Directors_: Diana Rowan, Susie Figgis, Victoria Thomas  
_Australia Casting Directors_: Alison Barrett, Robyn Cammell  
_Script Editor_: Billy Mackinnon  
_Written by_: Jane Campion  
_Maori Dialogue_: Waihoroi Shortland, Selwyn Muru  
_Director of Photography_: Stuart Dryburgh  
_2nd Unit Camera/Media Kit Camera_: Rewa Harre  
_Camera Operator_: Alun Bollinger  
_Gaffer_: Don Jowsey, Kevin Riley  
_Key Grip_: Geoff Jamieson  
_Special Effects Co-ordinator_: Waynne Rugg  
_Editor_: Veronika Jenet  
_Production Designer_: Andrew McAlpine  
_Supervising Art Director_: Gregory Keen  
_Set Decorator_: Meryl Cronin  
_Props Buyer_: Mark Grenfell  
_Costume Designer_: Janet Patterson  
_Wardrobe Co-ordinator_: Barbara Darrag  
_Hair/Make-up Supervisor_: Noriko Watanabe  
_Make-up for Holly Hunter_: Kathrine James  
_Prosthetics Supervisor_: Bob McCarron  
_Prosthetics_: Marjory Hamlin  
_Title Design_: Peter Long  
_Opticals_: Roger Cowland  
_Grading_: Arthur Cambridge  
_Music_: Michael Nyman  
_Solo Piano_: Holly Hunter  
_Music Performed by_: Munich Philharmonic Orchestra  
_Saxophones_: John Harle, David Roach, Andrew Findon  
_Choreography_: Mary-Anne Schultz  
_Sound Design_: Lee Smith  
_Sound Recording_: Tony Johnson  
_Sound Mixer_: Gethin Creagh  
_Boom Operator_: Alexander Paton  
_Dialogue Editor_: Gary O’Grady, Jeanine Chialvo  
_Effects Mixer_: Martin Oswin  
_Effects Editor_: Peter Townend  
_Fight/Stunt Co-ordinator/Safety Officer_: Robert Bruce  
_Maori Advisers_: Waihoroi Shortland, Selwyn Muru  
_Maori Performance and Language Adviser_: Temuera Morrison  

**Cast:**  
Holly Hunter _(Ada)_  
Harvey Keitel _(George Baines)_  
Sam Neill _(Stewart)_  
Anna Paquin _(Flora)_  
Kerry Walker _(Aunt Morag)_  
Genevieve Lemon _(Nessie)_

Tungia Baker _(Hira)_  
Ian Mune _(reverend)_  
Peter Dennett _(head seaman)_  
Te Whatanui Skipwith _(Chief Nihe)_  
Pete Smith _(Hone)_  
Bruce Allpress _(blind piano tuner)_  
Cliff Curtis _(Mana)_  
Carla Rupuha _(Heni)_  
Mahina Tunui _(Mere)_  
Hori Ahipene _(Mutu)_  
Gordon Hatfield _(Te Kori)_  
Mere Boynton _(Chief Nile’s daughter)_  
Kirsten Batley _(Marama)_  
Tania Burney _(Mahina)_  
Annie Edwards _(Te Tiwha)_  
Harina Haare _(Roimata)_  
Christina Harimate _(Parearau)_  
Steve Kanuta _(Amohia)_  
P.J. Karauria _(Taua)_  
Sonny Kirikiri _(Tame)_  
Alain Makiha _(Kahutia)_  
Greg Mayor _(Tipi)_  
Neil Mika Gudsell _(Tahu)_  
Guy Moana _(Kohuru)_  
Joseph Otimi _(Rehia)_  
Glynis Paraha _(Mairangi)_  
Riki Pickering _(Rongo)_  
Eru Potaka-Dewes _(Pitama)_  
Liane Rangi Henry _(Te Ao)_  
Huihana Rewa _(Te Hikumutu)_  
Tamati Rice _(Pito)_  
Paora Sharples _(Hotu)_  
George Smallman _(Tuu)_  
Kereama Teua _(Te Kukuni)_  
Poamo Tuialii _(Kahu)_  
Susan Tuialii _(Pare)_  
Kahumanu Waaka _(Waimiria)_  
Lawrence Wharerau _(Kamira)_  
Eddie Campbell, Roger Goodburn, Stephen Hall, Greg Johnson, Wayne McGoram _(seamen)_  
Jon Brazier _(wedding photographer)_  
Stephen Papps _(Bluebeard)_  
Nicola Baigent, Ruby Codner, Karen Colston, Verity George, Julie Steele _(Bluebeard’s wives)_  
Tim Raby, Jon Sperry _(taunting men)_  
Isobel Dryburgh, Harina Haare, Claire Lourie, Rose McIvor, Amber Main, Rachel Main _(angels)_  
Sean Abraham, Tomas Dryburgh, Simon Knight-Jones, Julian Lee, Daniel Lunn _(cloud carrier boys)_  
Barbara Grover _(school hall piano player)_  
Arthur Ranford _(school hall violin player)_  
Nicola Baigent _(Sunday school teacher)_  
Rob Ellis, Terrence Garbolino, William Matthew _(young wives’ husbands)_  
Nancy Flyger _(maid)_  
George Boyle _(Flora’s grandfather)_
Flynn _(Flynn, Baines’s dog)_  
  
Australia/France 1992©  
121 mins  
<br>
**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**  
**All the President’s Men**  
Fri 1 Jul 20:25; Tue 5 Jul 18:00; Sat 9 Jul 17:45  
**Battleship Potemkin (Bronenosets Potemkin)**  
Sat 2 Jul 11:50 (with live piano accompaniment); Fri 22 Jul 18:30 and Mon 25 Jul 20:50 (with Edmund Meisel score)  
**Pandora’s Box (Die Büchse der Pandora)**  
Sat 2 Jul 15:10 and Sat 16 Jul 12:20 (with Peer Raben score); Sun 31 Jul 15:20 (with live piano accompaniment)  
**Theorem (Teorema)**  
Sat 2 Jul 20:50; Mon 4 Jul 20:50; Tue 26 Jul 18:00  
**Rome Open City (Roma città aperta)**  
Sun 3 Jul 13:10; Mon 18 Jul 18:20; Wed 27 Jul 20:40  
**To Sleep with Anger**  
Wed 6 Jul 18:15 (+ intro); Fri 8 Jul 18:10  
**Day of Wrath (Vredens Dag)**  
Thu 7 Jul 18:15; Mon 11 Jul 20:30  
**Blue Velvet**  
Thu 7 Jul 20:40; Sun 17 Jul 18:30; Fri 29 Jul 20:40  
**Matewan**  
Fri 8 Jul 20:25; Tue 19 Jul 18:00  
**Manhunter**  
Fri 8 Jul 20:40; Thu 21 Jul 18:20; Sat 23 Jul 20:40  
**His Girl Friday**  
Sun 10 Jul 16:50; Wed 20 Jul 18:20 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large); Thu 28 Jul 20:45  
**The Scarlet Empress**  
Wed 13 Jul18:10 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large); Sun 24 Jul 13:20  
**The Piano**  
Thu 14 Jul 14:20; Sat 23 Jul 17:50; Sat 30 Jul 11:45  
**Mandabi (The Money Order)**  
Fri 15 Jul 20:40; Wed 27 Jul 18:10  

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
