---
layout: post
title: Raça
published: true
date: 2022-05-07
readtime: true
categories: ['AFRICAN ODYSSEYS']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'Brazil-USA 2013, 104 mins<br> Directors: Joel Zito Araújo, Megan Mylan'
pdf: '2022-05-07-raca.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A co-hosted by Victor Fraga, DMovies_

This documentary focuses on Brazil’s struggle for civil rights through the life and campaigns of men and woman from different walks of life: Paulo Paim, the only Black senator of the republic, attempts to enshrine race equality in the law; Brazilian pop singer Netinho de Paula tries to redress racial imbalance in the broadcast media; and Tiny dos Santos, activist and granddaughter of slaves, campaigns for land rights. Closely following their individual but interconnected activities, the filmmakers create a vivid and complex picture of race politics in contemporary Brazil.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**<br>

_Raça_ is a feature-documentary about race in Brazil, a topic igniting passionate debate across the country. Brazil imported ten times more slaves than the U.S. and was the last nation to abolish slavery. Yet, while race has been overtly divisive in most countries with a legacy of slavery, Brazil has long boasted of its intermixing and racial harmony. Today, however, Brazilians are awakening to the reality that opportunity increases directly with the whiteness of one’s skin. Half of all Brazilians are of African descent – the world’s second largest black population – yet they are nearly absent in the halls of power and history books. As their country’s economy booms, millions of black Brazilians are no longer willing for the disparities between light and dark skin to be explained away by class.

_Raça_ follows three people on the frontlines of this hauntingly familiar, yet quintessentially Brazilian, battle for equality. In the modernist capital of Brasilia, the country’s only black senator fights for landmark civil rights legislation. In the fast-paced metropolis of São Paulo, a famous black pop-star launches a TV station with a cast that looks like Brazil rather than Scandinavia. And deep in the rural countryside, a granddaughter of slaves mobilises her neighbours to defend ancestral land rights. Together, they form a vibrant portrait of a people struggling to redefine themselves and their nation.

**The Filmmakers**

**Megan Mylan** is a New York-based documentary filmmaker whose work has been recognised with an Academy Award®, Emmy-nomination, Independent Spirit Award and a Guggenheim Fellowship. She directed and produced the Oscar®-winning film _Smile Pinki_ broadcast on HBO and released theatrically in India. Her film, _Lost Boys of Sudan_, had a 70-city U.S. theatrical release and broad international television broadcast including PBS-POV in the U.S. Through an extensive social action campaign, _Lost Boys_ raised more than a million dollars for refugee education funds and recruited thousands of volunteer refugee mentors. Megan has worked on a wide variety of documentaries including the Oscar-nominated, _Long Night’s Journey into Day_ and Sundance award-winning _Sing Faster_. Before beginning in film, she worked in the U.S. and Brazil with Ashoka, an international network of social entrepreneurs. She has a Bachelor’s from Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service and Masters’ degrees in Journalism and Latin American Studies from the University of California at Berkeley where she was recently guest director of the Graduate Documentary Program.

**Joel Zito Araújo** is an award-winning Brazilian filmmaker. For over two decades, he has produced documentaries and narrative shorts dealing with social issues in Brazil, particularly the nation’s Afro-Brazilian population. His feature-documentary _Cinderellas, Lobos e um Príncipe Encantado_ about sexual tourism in Brazil enjoyed a strong theatrical and community release. His documentary _Negação do Brasil_ about the participation of black actors in Brazilian telenovelas won Best Documentary at the E Tudo Verdade film Festival. His feature-length narrative, _Filhas do Vento_ brought together the largest black cast in the history of Brazilian cinema. The Gramado Festival award-winning film generated intense media attention and screened widely in Brazil and internationally including New York’s Film Forum and MoMA. Joel is the recipient of a MacArthur Foundation fellowship and has a PhD in Communications from the University of São Paulo and was a visiting scholar at the University of Texas, Austin.<br>
**Production notes, racafilme.com**<br>

**RAÇA**<br>
_Directed and Produced by:_ Joel Zito Araújo, Megan Mylan<br>
_Presented by:_ Principe Productions, Casa De Criação<br>
_Field Producers:_ Mario Furloni,  Patrícia Freitas,  Valentina Homem<br>
_Post-production Producer:_ Marcelo Lessa<br>
_Assistant Director:_ Luis Carlos De Alencar<br>
_Camera:_ Alberto Bellezia<br>
_Editors:_ Jordana Berg, Megan Mylan<br>
_Additional Editing:_ Purcell Carson<br>
_Music:_ Seu Antonio, Lucio Rebello<br>
_Sound:_ Megan Mylan<br>

**With**<br>
Netinho De Paula<br>
Miúda Dos Santos<br>
Paulo Paim<br>

Brazil-USA 2013<br>
104 mins<br>


See also:
**UK Premiere: The Coup d´État Factory + discussion with chair, Baroness Christine Blower and special guests**<br>
A fascinating documentary about media manipulation of democracy in Brazil and beyond.<br>
Sunday 29 May 14:00<br>


**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
