---
layout: post
title: Pola X
published: true
date: 2022-05-05
readtime: true
categories: ['CRUEL FLESH<br>FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'France-Switzerland-Germany-Japan 1999, 134 mins<br> Director: Leos Carax'
pdf: '2022-05-05-pola-x.pdf'
---

**The films of the New French Extremity and the accompanying focus on Gaspar Noé examine an important, controversial and highly violent cinema movement. They are not suitable for all.**

**The film you are about to watch may contain very dark themes, graphic imagery, and scenes of a very upsetting nature including sexual violence and body horror.**

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Perhaps it is on account of excessive taboo-breaking (incest, terrorism, potentially unsimulated sex scenes) or the curse of its source material (Herman Melville’s professionally catastrophic 1852 novel, _Pierre: or the Ambiguities_) that Leos Carax’s _Pola X_ (1999) has fallen into relative obscurity: it is virtually unavailable in the UK, despite the filmmaker’s small but conspicuous footprint on the history of French cinema. The fourth of the five films in Carax’s swaggering body of work, _Pola X_ was perhaps too delirious and anarchic for audiences still dipping their toes into the new trend towards transgression later christened the ‘New French Extremity’.

A feral twist on the cliché of suffering for one’s art, _Pola X_ is Carax continuing, in a sense, his previous work’s fixation on young love run amok. Here, though, the object of desire is not the individual, but the notion of artistic truth. ‘Pola’ is an acronym for Melville’s novel (in French, _Pierre, ou les ambiguitiés_), which Carax recalibrates from New York to Paris; X refers to the tenth draft of the script – an arbitrary number, suggesting this version of the story is simply the one we get, out of countless frenzied possibilities. If in _Mauvais sang_ (1986) Carax channels  Jean-Luc Godard and Charlie Chaplin, then _Pola X_ is Carax in the manner of Antonin Artaud.

Pierre (Guillaume Depardieu) lives a pampered life with his widowed mother Marie (a leonine, sensual Catherine Deneuve). Motorbike cruising and sex with his soft-pink fiancée Lucie (Delphine Chuillot) punctuate his routine. Progress is slow on his second novel, but two phrases – ‘a mad recklessness’ and ‘a young irreversible love’ – stick out as he clicks away on his computer in a room overlooking a row of sprinklers endlessly watering a manicured lawn. _Pola X_ also represents for Depardieu a sort of mid-career fulcrum, marking a departure from boyish, hormone-riddled performances (as in Alain Courneau’s _Tous les matins du monde_, 1991) to mature, caustic roles post-millennium – such as the general Armand de Montriveau in Jacques Rivette’s _The Duchess of Langeais_, made in 2007, the year before Depardieu’s death from pneumonia.

Relationships are arranged and rearranged in pairs and trios, all linked by erotic charge to Pierre, regardless of familial boundaries: Pierre and Marie, lounging and tenderly caressing like old lovers in bed; Pierre, Lucie and cousin Thibault (Laurent Lucas), with whom a sexual relationship is teased. Then appears Isabelle (Yekaterina Golubeva), mangy but captivating, who will replace Lucie as the object of Pierre’s affections.

A refugee from the Bosnian Civil War, Isabelle entrances the golden boy with her plaintive beauty. She recounts her painful story to him in a dimly lit forest, their two bodies restless shape-shifters in the dank blue of the night (a _tour de force_ by cinematographer Eric Gautier, whose CV includes _Irma Vep_, 1996, _The Motorcycle Diaries_, 2004, and most recently _Ash Is Purest White_, 2018). In high-pitched, broken French she summons disconnected traumatic memories for nearly eight minutes, all captured in one long, mesmerising tracking shot. Crucially, Isabelle reveals she is Pierre’s long-lost half-sister; they will live as husband and wife, declares Pierre, newly inspired.

The couple find lodging in an abandoned warehouse where a group of terrorists spend their time rehearsing, banging on steel plates and instruments as if for an industrial noise band. The film is scored by the late Scott Walker, whose shivering holler can be heard in the heavier, experimental tracks. Freshly installed in a terrifying abode of angular metal staircases and open ceilings, Pierre begins to write. The camera hovers menacingly above their rooms, revealing a porousness to the walls around them, a susceptibility to the surrounding madness that aggravates, inspires and poisons Pierre with a similar clanging, joyless ferocity.

This second half of the film devolves into delirium and unchecked, raving physicality, the stylistic vehemence and narrative incomprehensibility mirroring Pierre’s degradation. For a film so concerned with the unmasking of truth (Pierre’s use of a pseudonym for his first novel; the revelation of a secret room in the chateau), the outcome of madness, death, and an ultimate return to static living suggests a horrifying circularity to Pierre’s endeavour.

As with Depardieu’s committed physical performance, the film’s most striking moments are articulated in terms of bodily ruptures: Pierre and Isabelle as disembodied limbs and writhing shapes during sex; Marie’s dead body splayed out on the road like a rag doll after a night-time motorbike ride in search of her son. Carax’s strangest inclinations might be manically disseminated, but it’s this unchecked, visceral life force just beyond articulation that packs a punch. And unlike Carax’s other films, such an unshackled, inwards-looking portrait of the artist has the effect of a pained, personal reflection on the limits of art.  
**Beatrice Loayza, _Sight & Sound_, October 2019**

Whether one regards _Pola X_ as a preposterous self-indulgent folly or as an improbable triumph of romantic audacity – in fact it’s a bit of both – there’s no denying Leos Carax’s intense imagination and commitment. His act of hubris and commercial perversity in updating and transposing to contemporary France Herman Melville’s critically savaged 1852 novel _Pierre, or the Ambiguities_ may be freighted in more ways than one. As a not-so-distant scion of the Dupont dynasty, Carax himself hails from a background similar to Pierre’s. Carax has indicated that the book has been an important one to him for many years and it’s not such a great leap to discern some degree of over-identification with Melville’s critical and commercial misfortunes. The film’s very title, an acronym of the book’s French title (_Pierre, ou les ambiguitiés_), foregrounds the act of adaptation, bringing us back to authorial will. On one level the film is an unmistakable if masochistic act of self-parody comparable to Melville’s. Even without the comedy of Pierre’s metamorphosis from graceful novelist of leisure into caricatured starving artist, there’s little doubt the publisher’s evaluation of his manuscript (‘A raving morass that reeks of plagiarism’) is a just one. On another level, the film, in all its deranged grandeur, represents a defiant refusal to capitulate to the dictates of commerce after the failure of _Les Amants du Pont-Neuf_ and nearly ten years in the wilderness.

At the same time, more than in any of his previous films, Carax invests the narrative with highly charged subtext. Pierre’s relationships with his mother and Thibault are visibly fraught with intimations of prior or latent sexual interest. Pierre and Marie address one another as ‘brother’ and ‘sister’ and enjoy an unusual level of intimacy. Pierre’s blonde cipher-fiancée Lucie and the dark waif Isabelle seem equally passive manifestations of Pierre’s implicit psychosexual crisis. Lucie is little more than a projection of Pierre’s own self-absorbed aristocratic entitlement, but as his cousin and a mirror image of his mother, she represents the next best thing to Marie herself.

Isabelle by contrast is a projection of Pierre’s guilt and self-loathing, a return of the repressed in both personal and historical terms. As his half-sister, she represents an opportunity to succumb to his desire for an ‘unnatural’ (incestuous) relationship. At the same time she is a reproachful spectre, an incarnation of the unspeakable suffering that has underwritten a century of European genocide in which his father and his class are implicated. This is made manifest in the film’s stunning prologue montage: an image of the earth from space accompanied by a voiceover quotation from _Hamlet_ (‘The time is out of joint...’), smash-cuts to dropping bombs. From this Carax cuts to the paradise of the Valombreuse estate, making an explicit connection between Pierre’s privilege and the horrors of 20th-century war.

Carax doesn’t idealise Pierre or the world he falls from any more than the cold industrial urban hell he descends into. In fact, the film’s most remarkable formal aspect is its bold use of visuals to balance the two realms. In one of the film’s pivotal scenes, Isabelle’s audaciously over-extended monologue explains her backstory as she and Pierre make their way through the woods at twilight. Carax tests legibility and exposition to breaking point in this scene, and its visual liminality becomes a metaphor for the contradictions in the director’s uniquely self-defeating talent. His narrative and formal risk-taking are indistinguishable from failure.  
**Gavin Smith, _Sight and Sound_, June 2000**
<br><br>

**POLA X**<br>
_Director_: Leos Carax<br>
_Presented by_: Aréna Films (Paris)<br>
_Production Companies_: Pola Production,  Théo Films, France 2 Cinéma,  
Pandora Filmproduktion, Euro Space, Vega Film<br>
_With the participation of_: Canal+, La Sept ARTE, ARD, Degeto Film, Télévision Suisse Romande, Filmstiftung NRW<br>
_With the support of_: Eurimages Conseil de l’Europe, Filmstiftung NRW, FFA – Filmförderungsanstalt, CNC – Centre national de la cinématographie, Procirep, L’Office Fédéral de la Culture Suisse du Département Fédéral de l’Intérieur<br>
_With the support of_: Amuse Inc., Digital Media Lab, TV Tokyo, Taiwa Inc, Dentsu<br>
_Executive Producers_: Albert Prévost,  Raimond Goebel<br>
_Producer_: Bruno Pesery<br>
_Commissioning Editor (WDR)_: Wolf-Dietrich Brücker<br>
_Associate Producers_: Karl Baumgartner, Kenzo Horikoshi, Ruth Waldburger<br>
_Unit Production Managers_: Christophe Frossard, Odile Marcel<br>
_Unit Production Managers (Germany)_:  Detlev Jansen, Marcelo Busse<br>
_Production Managers_: Sylvie Barthet,  Dschingis Bowakow<br>
_Production Accountant_: Laurence Picollec<br>
_Post-production Supervisor_: Françoise Piraud<br>
_Assistant Directors_: Gabriel Julien-Laferrière,  Émile Louis, Mathilde Cukierman, Arnauld Mercadier, Richard Kravetz,  Delphine Lemoine, Myriam Segall, Diane Stein-Bois<br>
_Assistant Directors (Germany)_:  Surk-Ki Schrade, Jürgen Jansen<br>
_Script Supervisor_: Élie Poicard<br>
_Casting_: Antoinette Boulat<br>
_Casting (Germany)_: Eve Kirchner, Outcast<br>
_Screenplay_: Leos Carax, Lauren Sedofsky, Jean-Pol Fargeau<br>
_Inspired by the novel by_: Herman Melville<br>
_Director of Photography_: Eric Gautier<br>
_Steadicam Operators_: Carlos Cabecerán, Patrick de Ranter<br>
_Special Digital Effects_: Ex Machina (Paris)<br>
_Special Effects_: Ex Machina (Paris), Pierre Foury, Benoît Squizzato, Georges Demétrau,  Daniel Lenoir, Jean-Christophe Magnoud)<br>
_Special Effects (Germany)_: Flash Art<br>
_Editor_: Nelly Quettier<br>
_Art Director_: Laurent Allaire<br>
_Set Decorator_: Régine Constant<br>
_Set Decorator (Germany)_: Anique-Fatum Celikasian<br>
_Sculptors_: Jean-François Grand, Anne Dollet, Laurent Garenne, Michel Tancelin<br>
_Property Master_: Bernard Bridon<br>
_Costumes_: Esther Walz<br>
_Wardrobe_: Corinne Bruand, Camille Ballouhey<br>
_Wardrobe (Catherine Deneuve)_: Chris Fageol<br>
_Wardrobe (Germany)_: Claudia Maria Braun, Elke Freitag<br>
_Make-up_: Bernard Floch<br>
_Make-up (Catherine Deneuve)_: Cédric Gérard<br>
_Make-up (Germany)_: Esmè Sciaroni, Kerstin Baar<br>
_Hairdresser_: Stéphane Malheu<br>
_Hairdresser (Catherine Deneuve)_: Agathe Moro<br>
_Hair Colourist_: Christophe Robin<br>
_Colour Timer_: Pierre Berlot<br>
_Music_: Scott Walker<br>
_Music Supervisor_: Negus-Fancey Co Ltd<br>
_Music Recordist/Mixer_: Geoff Foster<br>
_Sound_: Jean-Louis Ughetto, Béatrice Wick, Jean-Pierre Laforce<br>
_Sound Re-recording_: Vincent Montrobert,  Frank Mettre<br>
_Co-sound Re-recordist_: Stéphane Thiebault, Carl Goetgheluck<br>
_Recorder_: Benjamin Viot, Valérie Deloof,  Pascal Chauvin<br>
_Sound Effects_: Pascal Dédeye<br>
_ADR Recordists_: Jean-Pierre Hoüel,  Jean-Louis Lebras<br>
_Post-synchronization_: Marion Lorthioir<br>
_Equestrian Adviser_: Mario Luraschi<br>
_Armourer (Germany)_: GOS Filmservice<br>
_Animal Trainers_: Pierre Cadéac,  Fauna & Films Villemer<br>
_Stunts_: Jean-Louis Airola, Dominique Julienne, Action Cinéma, Ciné Cascade International<br>
_Stunts (Germany)_: Stuntteam Steinmeier<br>

**Cast**<br>
Guillaume Depardieu (_Pierre Valombreuse_)<br>
Katerina Golubeva (_Isabelle_)<br>
Catherine Deneuve (_Marie_)<br>
Delphine Chuillot (_Lucie de Boisieux_)<br>
Laurent Lucas (_Thibault_)<br>
Patachou (_Marguerite_)<br>
Petruta Catana (_Razerka_)<br>
Mihaela Silaghi (_the little girl_)<br>
Sharunas Bartas (_the boss_)<br>
Samuel Dupuy (_Fred, houseboy_)<br>
Mathias Mlekuz (_TV presenter_)<br>
Dine Souli (_taxi driver_)<br>
Miguel Yeco (_Augusto_)<br>
Khireddine Medjoubi (_café owner’s son_)<br>
Mark Zak (_Romanian friend_)<br>
Anne Richter (_chef’s wife_)<br>
Myriam Defremont, Michel B. Duperial,  Pascal Parmentier, Jean-Jacques Colin (_policemen_)<br>
Bill ‘Smog’ Callahan, Mario Gremlich, Bobo,  Kerstin Fischer, Tom Ivison, Tom Liwa,  Thomas Klein, Peter Sarach, Fritz Wittek, Till Lindemann, Steve Donnelly, Christoph Schneider, Stefan Claudius, Stuart Grimshaw, Roland Höppner, Markus Kirschbaum, Axel Neumann, Martin Siry, Julia Zanke, Kersten Ginsberg (_musicians_)<br>
Mouloud Larabi<br>
Blanche de Saint Phalle<br>
Marie Thomas<br>
Albert Prévost<br>
Sandrine Fleischmann<br>
Catherine Genièvre<br>

France-Switzerland-Germany-Japan 1999<br>
134 mins<br>
<br>

**CRUEL FLESH: FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY**<br>
**Carne + La Bouche de Jean-Pierre**<br>
Sun 1 May 11:50; Thu 12 May 20:45 (+ Q&A with Lucile Hadžihalilovic)<br>
**Baise-moi**<br>
Sun 1 May 18:20; Sat 7 May 20:50<br>
**The Ordeal (Calvaire)**<br>
Mon 2 May 12:30; Sun 22 May 18:20<br>
**Man Bites Dog (C’est arrivé près de chez vous)**<br>
Mon 2 May 15:10; Tue 10 May 20:55<br>
**Sex and Death, but Make It Arthouse**<br>
Tue 3 May 18:10<br>
**Trouble Every Day**<br>
Tue 3 May 20:30 (+ intro by writer and creative Sophie Monks Kaufman); Tue 24 May 20:45<br>
**Criminal Lovers (Les Amants criminels)**<br>
Wed 4 May 20:50; Sat 14 May 12:00<br>
**Pola X**<br>
Thu 5 May 20:25; Sat 28 May 17:50<br>
**Romance (Romance X)**<br>
Fri 6 May 18:00 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Tue 17 May 20:45<br>
**Philosophical Screens: Romance**<br>
Fri 6 May 20:00<br>
**In My Skin (Dans ma peau)**<br>
Sat 7 May 17:50 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Thu 19 May 20:40<br>
**High Tension (aka Switchblade Romance)  (Haute Tension)**<br>
Mon 9 May 18:00 (+ pre-recorded intro by author Alexandra West); Sat 28 May 12:20<br>
**Inside (À l’intérieur)**<br>
Sat 14 May 20:50; Thu 26 May 18:20<br>
**Them (Ils)**<br>
Mon 16 May 20:50; Sun 29 May 18:20<br>
**Irreversible** **(Irréversible)** (theatrical version)<br>
Sat 21 May 17:45<br>
**Martyrs**<br>
Sat 28 May 20:50; Tue 31 May 20:40<br>
**Horror à la Française**<br>
Free to view on the BFI YouTube channel from  11-31 May<br>
**BFI Courses: City Lit at the BFI:  New French Extremity**<br>
Every Tue from 10-31 May 18:30-20:30<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwOTg2NjY5NzddfQ==
-->
