---
layout: post
title: Ennio
published: true
date: 2022-04-22
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'Italy-Belgium-Japan-Germany-China 2021, 156 mins<br> Director: Giuseppe Tornatore'
pdf: '2022-04-22-ennio.pdf'
---

During the five years of filming _Ennio_, director Giuseppe Tornatore travelled across the globe to interview over 70 renowned filmmakers and musicians about the life and work of Ennio Morricone, from Wong Kar Wai, Bernardo Bertolucci, Quentin Tarantino, Clint Eastwood, John Williams, Hans Zimmer to Bruce Springsteen. These interviews are intercut with fragments of Morricone’s private life, recordings from Morricone’s acclaimed world concert tours, clips of classic films scored by Morricone, an assortment of stories from celebrated friends and colleagues and never-before-seen archival footage of places and scenes over a career that has spanned over 70 years.

**About Ennio Morricone**  
Born in 1928 in Rome, Ennio Morricone is one of the most influential composers in the history of cinema. His filmography includes over 70 award-winning films, including every film by Sergio Leone, Giuseppe Tornatore and decades of iconic films in Italy, France and Hollywood. Morricone enjoyed a lifelong cinematic partnership with his former schoolmate, Sergio Leone, who hired him to score the first of Leone’s Spaghetti Westerns, _A Fistful of Dollars_, in 1964. Morricone’s soundtrack for the last of the ‘Dollars trilogy’, _The Good, the Bad and the Ugly_, is widely considered one of the most influential film scores in cinema history and was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2009. Morricone has inspired many musicians from film scoring to rock bands, including Hans Zimmer, John Williams, Dire Straits, Muse, Metallica and Radiohead. Morricone has composed over 500 scores in film and television, over 100 classical works and sold over 70 million records over his 70-year-old career. In 2007, he received the Academy Honorary Award ‘for his magnificent and multifaceted contributions to the art of film music.’ He is one of only two composers to be awarded an honorary Oscar by the Academy. In 2016, Morricone received his first Academy Award for his score to Quentin Tarantino’s _The Hateful Eight_.

**About Giuseppe Tornatore**  
Born in Bagheria, Palermo. After many years dedicated to theatre, photography and the production of numerous documentaries, he debuted at just 29 as a film director with the movie _The Professor_, for which he also wrote the screenplay along with Massimo De Rita. It was in 1989, however, that he was thrust to international attention with _Cinema Paradiso_, written and directed by him, which won the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film. Tornatore’s films have been regularly distributed worldwide since then, garnering awards and success. Among the best known actors appearing in his films are:  Ben Gazzara, Jacques Perrin, Marcello Mastroianni, Michèle Morgan,  Sergio Castellitto, Laura Del Sol, Philippe Noiret, Tim Roth, Gerard Depardieu, Roman Polanski, Monica Bellucci, Michele Placido, Geoffrey Rush,  Jeremy Irons.

**Morricone x Tornatore**  
In 1988, Morricone started a longstanding and fruitful collaboration with Giuseppe Tornatore. His first score for Tornatore was for _Cinema Paradiso_ (1988), which won Best Foreign Language Film at the Academy Awards and the  Special Jury Prize at the 42nd Cannes Film Festival. Morricone also received a BAFTA for Best  Original Score for the film with his son, Andrea. Morricone would go on to score nine more films  for Tornatore, including  _The Legend of 1900_ (winner of Best Original Score at the Golden  Globes) and _Malèna_ (nominated for Best Original Score at the Academy Awards and the  Golden Globes).

**Morricone x Wong Kar Wai**  
Producer of _Ennio_, Wong Kar Wai’s first collaboration with Morricone came in Wong’s martial arts epic, _The Grandmaster_ (2013), which featured two classic tracks from Morricone, ‘La donna romantica’ and ‘Deborah’s Theme’ (from _Once upon a Time in America_), as an homage to Morricone and Sergio Leone.

**Production notes**

Speaking to _Sight and Sound_ in 2006, Ennio Morricone said that his work as a composer for film and his work as a composer of chamber music represented ‘two different worlds’. The former was ‘a service provided for a particular purpose’, the latter stemmed simply from ‘the need to create’. Such distinctions are nuanced further, and somewhat subverted, in _Ennio_, a handsome, chunky documentary directed by Giuseppe Tornatore which explores Morricone’s life and work through a formally conventional but appealing mix of archive, film and concert clips and new interviews.

The outpouring of tributes that followed Morricone’s death in 2020 confirmed his status as one of the most beloved and influential of contemporary composers. Given that Tornatore was a friend, and that Morricone scored a number of his films – most famously _Cinema Paradiso_ (1988) – the documentary’s affectionate tone is no surprise.

The film constructs a clear narrative, sketching Morricone’s early years from his first musical forays as a trumpet player in bands to his time studying at the Santa Cecilia Conservatory in Rome under the tutelage of Goffredo Petrassi. Petrassi’s presence is crucial, since his complicated relationship Morricone points to the wider scepticism of Italian classical musicians about the composer’s work in film and other ‘commercial’ arenas.

The documentary is strongest when at its most specific – charting Morricone’s evolving creative process across genres and digging into the details of compositions: the accounts of his collaborations with Sergio Leone on  _Once upon a Time in America_ (1984) and Roland Joffé on _The Mission_ (1986) are particularly absorbing. Though often far too brief, the contributions of associates and admirers – Dario Argento, Joan Baez, Quentin Tarantino,  Clint Eastwood, Bernardo Bertolucci and the Taviani brothers, among them – provide incisive commentary. In interview, Morricone himself is genial and animated, his emotions disarmingly close to the surface: he tears up when recalling past disappointments, glows when describing happy, productive times. The inevitable sketchiness about certain aspects of his life and personality also seems appropriate. ‘He’s a very enigmatic character even if he doesn’t seem like it,’ says the singer-songwriter Gino Paoli. _Ennio_ illuminates its subject while keeping a core of mystery intact.  
**Alex Ramon, _Sight and Sound_, May 2022**
<br><br>

**ENNIO**  
_A film by_: Giuseppe Tornatore  
©: PianoB produzioni, Potemkino, Gaga, Terras  
_Co-produced by_: Potemkino  
_Production Company_: PianoB produzioni  
_Co-produced by_: Gaga Corporation,  Blossoms Island, Terras  
_With the contribution of_: Eurimages, Bulgari  
_With the help of_: Musica e oltre - The Official  Ennio Morricone Legacy Company  
_In collaboration with_: Bridging the Dragon  
_Worldwide Sales_: BLK2 Distribution  
_Executive Producer for Gaga_: Tom Yoda  
_Executive Producer for Blossom Island_:  Wong Kar Wai  
_Producers (for PianoB Produzioni)_:  Gabriele Costa, Gianni Russo  
_Producer for Potemkino_: Peter De Maegd  
_Producer for Terras_: San Fu Maltha  
_Associate Producer_: Gisella Marengo  
_Production Managers_: Beatrice Kildani, Lorenzo Quagliozzi, Giuditta De Franceschi, Simona Sebastianelli, Emilia D'Agata, Stefano Zaccaria, Fulvio Romano Prieto, Rossella Agostini, Greta Soldati, Stefano Zaccaria  
_Production Supervisors_: Francesco Migeni,  Daniela Ricciardi, Fabrizio Amato, Raffaella Cassano  
_Lead Accountant_: Maurizio Sebastianelli  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Erika Scaramella  
_Production Consultant_: Mauro Calevi  
_Directors of Photography_: Fabio Zamarion,  Giancarlo Leggeri  
_Camera Operators_: Giancarlo Leggeri,  Pierre Giorgio Palazzo, Giorgio Fracassi,  Andrea Giacomini, Federico Catalano,  Riccardo Marino, Giuliano Graziani, Alfonso Nastri  
_Visual Effects_: Tango Produzioni  
_Editors_: Massimo Quaglia, Annalisa Schillaci  
_Set Decorator_: Marco Martucci  
_Graphic Design_: Roberto Laurenzi  
_Colourist_: Christian Gazzi  
_Music Supervisor_: Fabio Venturi  
_Sound_: Massimo Simonetti, Claudio Bagni,  Peter M. Beer, Alfredo Petti, Antonio Dardo, Antongiorgio Sabia  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Gianni Pallotto  
_Sound Editor_: Francesco Vallocchia  
_Footage Aquisition_: Alessandro Zambrini

Italy-Belgium-Japan-Germany-China 2021©  
156 mins

A Dogwoof Films release
<br><br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTM3MDMxMzY3XX0=
-->
