---
layout: post
title: Le Havre
published: true
date: 2022-06-20
readtime: true
categories: ['REFUGEE WEEK']
tags: [Drama, Comedy]
metadata: 'Finland-France-Germany-Norway 2011, 93 mins<br> Director: Aki Kaurismäki'
pdf: '2022-06-20-le-havre.pdf'
---

**Aki Kaurismäki on ‘Le Havre’**

_A character named Marcel Marx appeared in your 1992 film_ La Vie de bohème: _and André Wilms plays him again in_ Le Havre _. Is he the same character?_

Yes, I saved some trouble because I wouldn’t have to invent a new character. I had one in the pocket. Everybody is repeating themselves, so it should be all right for me too, and it’s ecological. Everybody has one story and they’re making variations of it. That’s what makes it interesting, how the variations change during the years. If you’re polite, you call it style. The directors who change all the time, they’re called professionals. I wonder how come they are professionals if they have no style.

_One variation in_ Le Havre _is that a lot of your earlier films ended with the characters emigrating, whereas this time they start as immigrants._

I am an immigrant myself [Kaurismäki now lives in Portugal]. I used to send  the characters out of the country, but after I left Finland myself, I let the characters in.

_As an immigrant yourself, was this a subject you’d wanted to film for a long time? Presumably you didn't go to Portugal in a packing case..._

No, I just wanted to get out of Finland.

_So there was never any chance of making a story like_ Le Havre _in Finland?_

Nobody is so desperate that they want to be a refugee in Finland. Apart from gypsies who have been begging in the streets of Helsinki – and the whole country is in a mess, because they don’t know what to do. Because they are a democracy and they can’t just kill them, they try to push them away somewhere in a Nordic way, which means that nothing’s done and they are in misery, because it’s a Nordic social-democrat country.

_Which is one of the themes of_ The Man without a Past, _isn’t it?_

Yes.

_Talking of recurring themes, Chang in_ Le Havre _(played by Vietnamese-born Quoc-Dung Nguyen) is somebody who’s also consciously erased his past. He’s not so much without one entirely, but he knows that it has no value  any more._

He’s an interesting actor. I found him in a Swiss film, and I found out in the middle of shooting that he’s not an actor, he’s an electrician. But I liked his face so much: his smile could light a whole city.

_Where did you find Blondin Miguel, the boy who plays the Gabonese  refugee Idrissa?_

We checked all the Paris schools, and I had five who I liked, but I had to choose. There was something in him. Never two takes with him – only with professionals.

_I was impressed to see that Laïka the dog got an opening credit in_ Le Havre _along with the actors._

She stole the show. And since I am the producer, I always use my own dogs. They’re cheap. I have to feed them anyway.

_And you’re their agent as well?_

No, my wife is. So it’s tough negotiation. When I start to write the screenplay, always on the third day my wife comes and says: ‘Is there any part for a dog?’ She’s a good manager. And the dogs always remember their dialogue. The actors always don’t I mean, the other actors.

_The screening of_ Le Havre _I went to was the first time I’d ever seen one of your films digitally projected. But you’re still shooting on 35mm, aren’t you?_

I shall die with my boots on, but I’m a bit worried because since Kodak is gone, I will have to start deep-freezing material over the next few years.

_Your films are dealing with darker subjects – unemployment, mental illness and horrible human exploitation – but at the same time they also seem to be getting happier._

I think if people buy the ticket to go to the cinema, I have no heart anymore to get them leaving the cinema sadder than when they come in. I want them happier when they go out, which is some value for their money. Don’t tell anybody, but I have a tender heart. At least I did when I still had a heart.

_You’re obviously a big fan of classic French cinema._

If I had shot this in Italy, I would be a big fan of Italian cinema. I even smuggled some neorealism into this, but also there was a neorealist period in French cinema which is mostly in the shadow of Italian neorealism, because it was more clear in Italy. But in French cinema before the war there was the same cinema, a kind of neorealism.

_Your first feature back in 1983 was an adaptation of_ Crime and Punishment _. There’s an echo of Dostoevsky in_ Le Havre _too, in the character of  Inspector Monet._

There is, yes, in the scene at the very end where he comes to the home of Marcel Marx. I remember when I wrote it, I wrote the character of [_Crime and Punishment_’s detective] Porfiry Petrovich in this scene, just to amuse myself. Monet reminded me of the good policeman in Dostoevsky’s book. He’s kind of rebelling. And he hates his boss. Which is a reasonable sign of any worker.

_Everyone who’s seen_ Le Havre _seems to remember the scene where Inspector Monet spontaneously buys a pineapple and takes it into the café with him.  Was that scene scripted?_

It was improvised. I didn’t write the character very well, and the pineapple just happened to be there. Then I remembered _Nazarín_ – in the last scene he’s walking with the pineapple in Calanda, with the drums playing. So it was all channelled from Monsieur Buñuel, who is my hero. I was quite a Buñuel fan in my youth, and I still am. He was the first and the last rebel of cinema.

**Aki Kaurismäki interviewed by Michael Brooke, _Sight & Sound_, May 2012**
<br><br>

**LE HAVRE**<br>
_Director:_ Aki Kaurismäki<br>
©: Sputnik Oy, Pyramide Productions,  Pandora Film, ARTE France Cinéma<br>
_Production Companies:_ Sputnik Oy,  Pyramide Productions, Pandora Film<br>
_In co-production with:_ ARTE France Cinéma, ZDF/Arte<br>
_With the participation of:_ Fondation Finlandaise de la Cinématographie, Canal+, Nordisk Film & TV Fond, Centre National du Cinéma et de l’image animée, YLE Co-productions, CinéCinéma, ARTE France, Région Haute-Normandie, Arte GEIE<br>
_Supported by:_ Région Haute-Normandie in partnership with CNC and in association with  Pôle Image Haut-Normandie<br>
_Executive Producers_: Fabienne Vonier,  Reinhard Brundig, Hanna Hemilä (Finland)<br>
_Producer:_ Aki Kaurismäki<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ Gilles Charmant<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Malla Hukkanen<br>
_Casting:_ Gilles Charmant<br>
_Written by:_ Aki Kaurismäki<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Timo Salminen<br>
_Editor:_ Timo Linnasalo<br>
_Art Director:_ Wouter Zoon<br>
_Costumes:_ Fred Cambier<br>
_Sound Recordist:_ Tero Malmberg<br>

**Cast**<br>
André Wilms _(Marcel Marx)_<br>
Kati Outinen _(Arletty)_<br>
Jean-Pierre Darroussin _(Inspector Monet)_<br>
Blondin Miguel _(Idrissa)_<br>
Elina Salo _(Claire)_<br>
Evelyne Didi _(Yvette)_<br>
Quoc-Dung Nguyen _(Chang)_<br>
Laïka _(Laïka)_<br>
François Monnié _(grocer)_<br>
Roberto Piazza aka Little Bob _(Little Bob)_<br>
Pierre Étaix _(Doctor Becker)_<br>
Jean-Pierre Léaud _(denouncer)_<br>

Finland-France-Germany-Norway 2011©<br>
93 mins<br>
<br>

**REGULAR PROGRAMME**<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera Preview:  Moon, 66 Questions (Selini, 66 erotiseis)+ Q&A with writer-director Jacqueline Lentzou**<br>
Wed 22 Jun 18:00<br>
**Terror Vision: Terror + intro with screenwriter David McGillivray and actor Tricia Walsh**<br>
Fri 24 Jun 18:00<br>
**Relaxed Screening: In Pursuit of Silence  + intro and discussion**<br>
Mon 27 Jun 18:20<br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Experimenta Presents: Premiere: Wayfinder  + Q&A with director Larry Achiampong**<br>
Tue 21 Jun 18:15<br>
**Burning an Illusion + intro by actor  Cassie McFarlane**<br>
Mon 27 Jun 18:00<br>
**Preview: The Afterlight + Q&A with director Charlie Shackleton**<br>
Wed 29 Jun 18:20<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTgwMTM5OTEwXX0=
-->
