---
layout: post
title: Romance
published: true
date: 2022-05-06
readtime: true
categories: ['CRUEL FLESH<br>FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'France 1999, 99 mins<br> Director: Catherine Breillat'
pdf: '2022-05-06-romance.pdf'
---

**The films of the New French Extremity and the accompanying focus on Gaspar Noé examine an important, controversial and highly violent cinema movement. They are not suitable for all.**

**The film you are about to watch may contain very dark themes, graphic imagery, and scenes of a very upsetting nature including sexual violence and body horror.**

**Catherine Breillat on ‘Romance’**

_The film foregrounds sexuality to explore the relationship between men and women. How did you hope or imagine the film would play to male and female audiences?_

From what I read about the film and what I experienced by going to screenings, looking at it and talking to the audience, most of the women were very happy about the film because they thought it was the first time a movie talked about something they wanted discussed. Men thought it was very interesting as a tool to explore something they maybe didn’t know enough about or needed to know more about.

_How did you relate to the character of Marie, and what was your relationship to the developing sexual philosophy that she narrates through the film? Is there any ironic distance?_

I have no distance from the film. When I set about shooting _Romance_, I thought I would film what is not said, and when it was finished it was a revelation for me – to look at it and see the meaning of it once it was done. I had no distance. I made it as I was doing it; the film happened as I was shooting it.

_So your two different roles – as writer and director – both came together in the process of making it?_

There was a complete dissociation between the screenwriter and the filmmaker. I wrote the screenplay on a daily basis, and [as a screenwriter] my first interest was the sentimental, romance story, _then_ the sexual exploration. On a day-to-day basis, it was like going down to hell, seeing how far I could go. It’s a bit like _Looking for Mr Goodbar_, where you see how far you can go and how down you can go. Because it was done on a daily basis I could hold down the self-censorship that comes from preconceived ideas. So when the filmmaker in me made the film, it totally turned around the sense and meaning of what was written in the script. As a scriptwriter the good quality was the sentimental story and what was negative was the sexual exploration. As a filmmaker what became apparent when I saw the film was that the relationship between Marie and Paul – this passion – is in fact degradation, and the sexual journey is in fact a revelation, a transcendence.

_The text that the film most reminded me of was The Story of O in its exploration of self-annihilation and masochism, although it has a happier ending. O is politically problematic  for women, so how do you anticipate responses to the open exploration of masochism  in Romance?_

I don’t explore masochism. On the contrary, the relationship that Marie has with her boyfriend is based on masochism and self-depreciation. On her journey she goes through scenes of masochism and learns to free herself – exactly the opposite of _The Story of O_, which posits the norm is pleasure through masochism and through being dominated. The headmaster in _Romance_ doesn’t initiate her through masochism: on the contrary, he uses her masochism to take her to the other side and free her from masochism. He uses the fact that she is used to masochism, through her relationship with Paul, to take her somewhere else. It’s what we call fighting fire with fire. The film is an initiate’s journey. It is like in the myth of King Arthur, when Lancelot is on the dangerous path and on the edge of the razor.

_But the way you articulate that, it sounds like the men teach her this rather than her learning it from her experiences. Is it a self-realisation?_

Yes – she is the one who chooses them.

_I want to ask about the explicit sexuality of the film. I was interested in the fact that in many ways it’s the male body which is most explicitly exposed in this film._

I don’t think the male body is exposed in this film. The actor who was going to play Paul (Sagamore Stévenin) didn’t know he was going to play Paul, because to start with he was going to play Paolo – the other part – and then I hired a real porn actor to play Paolo; in the end [Stévenin] moved on to play Paul, so he didn’t realise that he would be a little bit exposed. Obviously a female filmmaker sees more of men than men themselves. Male filmmakers are shy and far more prudish about this.

_Are you interested in male spectacle because you are a female filmmaker?_

Naked males on screen are very interesting and I don’t see why it should always be women on display up there for men.

_Would you ever consent to your film being cut?_

In France the thing which could have created a problem is the fantasy brothel scene. If they had wanted it censored there I wanted to keep the sound running over a black screen, and outside the cinema, as people leave, give them a VHS of the thing which had been cut. If there is censorship, people should know there is censorship and why. Censorship should be seen as a scar, which is why I wanted to keep the sound running over a black screen. If the film is deemed to be obscene then the scene has to be identified and [its obscenity] explained.

_That’s all bound up with the way that pornography has been classified in this country. So how do you define the relationship between this film and pornography?_

Pornography doesn’t exist. What exists is censorship which defines pornography and separates it from the rest of film. Unless, that is, people think that as a race we are pornographic – in which case we need an operation! Pornography is the sexual act taken totally out of context, and made into a product for consumption, by using the most debased feelings or emotions of people, when in fact in daily life sexual acts are surrounded by emotions, consideration for the partner, pleasure and so on, which do not come within the pornographic depiction. So pornography as an industry is a prostitution of the common and valuable human emotions and acts which everybody does in their day-to-day life. There are no actors, because they don’t carry any emotions, they don’t carry character. They are just flesh. Rocco Siffredi, the porn actor who plays Paolo, says the same thing.

_So what distinguishes this film from pornography?_

In _Romance_ the images portray an idea and the characters experience emotion. The viewer intuits the emotion through the images he is watching. That is the difference between it and pornography.

_The film explicitly transgresses the boundary between acted sex and real sex, so how did you deal with that on set – from the actors’ and the crew’s point of view?_

There’s a lot of hypocrisy in putting a moral value on the question ‘Are they really doing it or not?’ If you look at what most mainstream actors are doing now, more and more the love scenes are very intimate and very frank, so it’s hypocrisy to ask: ‘Do they really penetrate or not?’ Actors do not simulate: they don’t simulate emotions, so at the same time they cannot simulate pleasure – they have to act it. So as they are not going to be able to simulate pleasure, they are going to have to act pleasure. After that it’s just really a physical detail.  The difficulty is not in the performance from the actor while they are on set; the difficulty comes afterwards. Are they going to be seen performing the act on the screen by society, by their close family, by the people they’re in relationships with – this was the real difficulty.

_So did the actors find that difficult? Were they happy to enter into this?_

The only problem I had was between Rocco Siffredi and Caroline Ducey, because they were coming from two worlds totally apart. For Caroline it was almost like a sacrificial ritual and she was exalted every time she went from one experience to the other; she pushed herself every time, and was happy to achieve that emotional range, so it was no problem. I did explain before to Caroline that there should be no censorship, there should be nowhere that we would have to stop, because censorship defines obscenity, and I didn’t want to do anything obscene. It was more a trip of self-discovery, and for Caroline to go as far as she wanted, it was an exaltation to reach that stage.

_So in a sense the actor’s relationship to the role mirrored the movement of the role itself in that self-exploration?_

Yes, but not totally mirroring, because Caroline in her personal life is not as repressed or prudish as Marie is in the film – she didn’t have the same baggage.

**Interview by Linda Ruth Williams, _Sight and Sound_, October 1999**
<br><br>

**ROMANCE**  
_Director_: Catherine Breillat  
_Production Companies_: Flach Film,  CB Films, ARTE  
_With participation of_: CNC - Centre national de la cinématographie, Procirep, Canal+  
_Executive Producer_: Catherine Jacques,  C.J. Production  
_Producer_: Jean-François Lepetit  
_Unit Managers_: Samir Larrif,  Jean-Marc Maestracci, Max Belmessieri, Laurent Charchaude, Eric Margolis,  Philippe Guérinel, Denis Oliveau-Lebreton  
_Production Manager_: Eddy Jabès  
_Production_: Anne Rogé  
_Location Manager_: Alexandre Putman  
_Post-production_: Bernard Brun  
_1st Assistant Director_: Michaël Weill  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Fabrice Bigot  
_Script Supervisor_: Séverine Siaut  
_Casting_: Michaël Weill, Estelle Bertrand, Nicolas Lublin, Guylène Péan, Jacques Grant, Catherine Hofer  
_Screenplay_: Catherine Breillat  
_Director of Photography_: Yorgos Arvanitis  
_Camera Operator (Birth Sequence)_:  Roger-Paul Tizio  
_Steadicam_: Éric Leroux  
_Editor_: Agnès Guillemot  
_Art Director_: Frédérique Belvaux  
_Additional Art Directors_: Pierre Gerbaux, Alexis Forestier  
_Set Decorator_: Valérie Leblanc Weber  
_Costumes_: Anne Dunsford Varenne  
_Carla’s Wardrobe_: Christian Lacroix  
_Wardrobe_: Janet Latimer  
_Make-up/Hair_: Claire Monatte  
_Additional Make-up_: Pascal Thiollier  
_Additional Hairdressers_: Antoine Amador, Christian Moralès  
_Titles_: Ercidan  
_Music_: D.J. Valentin, Raphaël Tidas  
_Music Co-ordinator_: Jean-Marie Leau  
_Sound_: Paul Lainé  
_Mixer_: Eric Bonnard  
_Sound Editor_: Emmanuel Augeard  
_Sound Effects_: Pascal Chauvin  
_Subtitles_: A. Whitelaw

**Cast**  
Caroline Ducey _(Marie)_  
Sagamore Stévenin _(Paul)_  
François Berléand _(Robert Weil)_  
Rocco Siffredi _(Paolo)_  
Reza Habouhossein _(man on stairs)_  
Ashley Wanninger _(Ashley)_  
Emma Colberti _(Charlotte)_  
Fabien de Jomaron _(Claude)_  
Carla _(model, Arlès)_  
Pierre Maufront _(photographer, Arlès)_  
Antoine Amador _(hairdresser, Arlès)_  
Roman Rouzier _(echographist)_  
Olivier Buchette _(senior doctor)_  
Emmanuelle N’guyen _(midwife)_  
Nadia Latoui _(nurse)_  
Sylvie Drieu _(attendant)_  
Samuel Chartier, Alexis Gignoux,  
Muriel Grégoire, Sébastien Jochmans, Emmanuel Salengro _(interns)_  
Mélissa _(Marie’s stand-in, dream sequence)_  
Christian Poutrasson _(man alone, dream sequence)_  
Roberto Malone, Coco, Steve Cox,  Jean-Pierre Daniel, Fovéa, Bernard Garreau, Pierre-Gustave Hervé, Kosta, Alain Lille, Kevin Long, Aziz, Marco, Karine Menachemoff, Angélique Polosse, Salomé, Cédric Samson, Yamine, Tamerhoulet, Tramber, Vince, Caroline Virly

France 1999©  
99 mins

The screening on Fri 6 May will be introduced by Catherine Wheatley,  
King’s College London.
<br><br>

**CRUEL FLESH: FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY**<br>
**Carne + La Bouche de Jean-Pierre**<br>
Sun 1 May 11:50; Thu 12 May 20:45 (+ Q&A with Lucile Hadžihalilovic)<br>
**Baise-moi**<br>
Sun 1 May 18:20; Sat 7 May 20:50<br>
**The Ordeal (Calvaire)**<br>
Mon 2 May 12:30; Sun 22 May 18:20<br>
**Man Bites Dog (C’est arrivé près de chez vous)**<br>
Mon 2 May 15:10; Tue 10 May 20:55<br>
**Sex and Death, but Make It Arthouse**<br>
Tue 3 May 18:10<br>
**Trouble Every Day**<br>
Tue 3 May 20:30 (+ intro by writer and creative Sophie Monks Kaufman); Tue 24 May 20:45<br>
**Criminal Lovers (Les Amants criminels)**<br>
Wed 4 May 20:50; Sat 14 May 12:00<br>
**Pola X**<br>
Thu 5 May 20:25; Sat 28 May 17:50<br>
**Romance (Romance X)**<br>
Fri 6 May 18:00 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Tue 17 May 20:45<br>
**Philosophical Screens: Romance**<br>
Fri 6 May 20:00<br>
**In My Skin (Dans ma peau)**<br>
Sat 7 May 17:50 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Thu 19 May 20:40<br>
**High Tension (aka Switchblade Romance)  (Haute Tension)**<br>
Mon 9 May 18:00 (+ pre-recorded intro by author Alexandra West); Sat 28 May 12:20<br>
**Inside (À l’intérieur)**<br>
Sat 14 May 20:50; Thu 26 May 18:20<br>
**Them (Ils)**<br>
Mon 16 May 20:50; Sun 29 May 18:20<br>
**Irreversible** **(Irréversible)** (theatrical version)<br>
Sat 21 May 17:45<br>
**Martyrs**<br>
Sat 28 May 20:50; Tue 31 May 20:40<br>
**Horror à la Française**<br>
Free to view on the BFI YouTube channel from  11-31 May<br>
**BFI Courses: City Lit at the BFI:  New French Extremity**<br>
Every Tue from 10-31 May 18:30-20:30<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE0MTA3OTMzOTZdfQ==
-->
