---
layout: post
title: Jawbone
published: true
date: 2022-09-03
readtime: true
categories: ['EVENTS']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'UK 201, 91 mins<br> Director: Thomas Napper'
pdf: '2022-09-01-sorcerer.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with writer-actor Johnny Harris, actors Michael Smiley and Ray Winstone and director Thomas Napper_

Marking the arrival of a new photobook _Jawbone: The Autobiography of a Film_, Johnny Harris reunites with his fellow cast members to reflect on the making of their brutal and authentic British boxing drama. The film follows the journey of Jimmy (fiercely portrayed by Harris, who also wrote the screenplay), a former junior boxing champion who after hitting rock bottom, returns to his childhood club hoping to train and fight again.  

Signed copies of the book are available to purchase.
**bfi.org.uk**  

A washed-up fighter returning to the ring. One more big fight. One last chance at redemption. Stop us if you’ve heard it all before – many, many times. Certainly, there’s little new in this modestly proportioned British independent offering, apart from a rather oblique title inspired by a biblical reference to strongman Samson’s implement of choice. Cinema history, however, teaches us never to underestimate the resilience of this particular story outline: Sylvester Stallone’s original _Rocky_ (1976) and Darren Aronofsky’s  _The Wrestler_ (2008), for instance, have shown that the clichés can indeed spring to life again if you resist the temptation to reinvent the material and instead commit to its hackneyed truths wholeheartedly. That’s exactly what writer-producer-star Johnny Harris has done here, delivering a purposeful, evidently sincere drama that’s surprisingly involving even though we can guess pretty much all its moves in advance.

Probably best known as the reprehensible pimp in 2006’s _London to Brighton_, and a regular in three series of Shane Meadows’s TV youth saga _This Is England_ (2010-15), Harris has carved out a solid list of credits in the past decade or so without quite assuming headlining status, and kudos to him for generating his own content to show off his range. As Jimmy McCabe, the one-time youth champion boxer now marinating in hard liquor, rage and self-loathing, he turns in a believably lived-in performance that’s convincing from the off, as director Thomas Napper’s camera confronts his bleary features in sundry full-on close-ups. We have only to look at this guy to know his story, and that same sense of presence and alertness extends to the film’s other key performers. You’d forgive veteran Ian McShane for simply phoning it in as yet another sleek crime boss, but his big scene here is absolutely on the money, conjuring steely threat behind faux bonhomie. Ray Winstone also hits top form as boxing-gym proprietor Bill, a wise and watchful older man who’s not about to waste a single breath or gesture. And almost eclipsing everyone is Michael Smiley – as ever, British independent cinema’s most valuable supporting turn – here totally in the zone as the good-egg cornerman whose palpable investment in the ebb and flow of the bloody climactic bout helps to bring a familiar scene emotionally alive.

Napper (in his feature debut after a string of high-profile second-unit assignments) also makes an astute contribution at this point, playing with the shutter speed to create a flickering effect that conveys the dynamic essence of the persuasive fight choreography, and helpfully providing a fresh visual approach when it’s really needed. Elsewhere, he is also very attuned to a specific sense of place, with repeated low-angled shots of Jimmy running under the old brick railway bridges just south of the Thames effectively building oppressive weight on the hard-pressed protagonist. A small detail, perhaps, but typical of a film in which the direction and performances are focused and effective in getting the absolute most out of the material in front of them. Not a groundbreaker, but certainly an appreciable lesson in potency of application.  
**Trevor Johnston, _Sight & Sound_, June 2017**  

**JAWBONE**  
_Directed by_: Thomas Napper  
_©_: UME8 Limited, British Broadcasting Corporation  
_Production Companies_: EMU Films, Marlin Films, Revolution Films  
_Developed with the support of_: BFI Film Fund, BBC  
_Supported by_: Creative England through the West Midlands Production Fund, Creative England through the West Midlands Production Fund  
_Presented by_: BBC Films, Creative England  
_In association with_: LipSync Productions LLP  
_Executive Producers_: Adam Smith, Andrew Eaton, Christine Langan, Nichola Martin, Richard Holmes, Celine Haddad, Peter Hampden, Norman Merry  
_Produced by_: Michael Elliott  
_Producer_: Johnny Harris  
_Line Producer_: Donna Mabey  
_Associate Producers_: Jim Mooney, Walli Ullah, Mark Baxter  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Caroline Bean  
_Production Accountant_: Richard Juneman  
_Unit Manager_: Tom Plumptree  
_Location Manager_: Monty Allan  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Miranda Jones  
_Post-production Co-ordinator_: Nadiya Luthra  
_Production Secretary_: Charlotte Dudson  
_1st Assistant Director_: Liam Lock  
_Script Supervisors_: Jane Burrows, Jane Simon  
_Casting Director_: Dixie Chassay  
_Casting Associate_: Isabella Odoffin  
_Written by_: Johnny Harris  
_Director of Photography_: Tat Radcliffe  
_Steadicam Operator_: Matt Fisher  
_Focus Puller_: Tim Potter  
_Clapper Loader_: Jermaine Edwards  
_Gaffer_: Andy Lowe  
_Grip_: Robin Stone, Warwick Drucker  
_Stills Photographers_: Lee Cogswell, Simon Thorpe, Liam Daniel  
_Visual Effects by_: LipSync Post  
_Special Effects Supervisors_: Scott MacIntyre, Scott Peters  
_Editor_: David Charap  
_Assistant Editor_: Gez Morris  
_Post-production Services by_: LipSync Post  
_Production Designer_: Nick Palmer  
_Assistant Art Director_: Becky Gilbanks  
_Production Buyer_: Annabelle Bevan  
_Costume Designer_: Guy Speranza  
_Costume Supervisor_: Sophie O’Neill  
_Costume Standby_: Hilary Hughes  
_Junior Costume Standby_: Caitriona Anglim  
_Hair and Make-up Designer_: Scarlett O’Connell  
_Prosthetic Designer_: Scarlett O’Connell  
_Titles by_: LipSync Design  
_Music by_: Paul Weller  
_Original Music Composed by_: Paul Weller
_Score Performed and Produced by_: Paul Weller  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Jerome McCann  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Robert Farr  
_Supervising Sound Editors_: Andy Shelley, Stephen Griffiths  
_Dialogue Editor_: Justin Dolby  
_Sound Effects Editor_: Matis Rei
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Tom Lucy  
_Additional Stunt Co-ordinator_: Vincent Keane  
_Boxing Consultants_: Barry McGuigan, Shane McGuigan  
_Personal Trainers to Mr Harris_: Shane McGuigan, Steve Broughton, Barry McGuigan  
_In loving memory of_: Christopher Collins  
_The filmmakers wish to thank_: Vicky McClure, Daniel Day-Lewis, Shane Meadows, Danny Leigh  

**Cast**  
Johnny Harris _(Jimmy McCabe)_  
Ray Winstone _(Bill)_  
Michael Smiley _(Eddie)_  
Ian McShane _(Joe Padgett)_  
Alex Earp _(housing office interviewee)_  
Simon Manyonda _(housing officer)_  
Nick Preston _(security guard 1)_  
Daniel Wellington _(security guard 2)_  
Jackie Clune _(manager)_  
Steve Broughton _(Daryll, trainer)_  
Haqi Ali _(passerby)_  
Marcus Le Doux _(sparring partner)_  
Ony Uhiara _(waitress)_  
Richard Smikle _(Joseph)_  
Anna Wilson-Hall _(Mary)_  
Alan Gibson _(Tommy)_  
Neil Bradley _(Michael, the newcomer)_  
Scott Lawton _(sparring partner 2)_  
Nigel Travis _(opponent’s trainer)_  
Paul ‘Soggy’ Counihan _(opponent’s cut man)_  
Luke J. Smith _(Damian Luke, unlicensed opponent)_  
Neil Hateley _(opponent’s pad man)_  
Vincent Davis _(lackey)_  
Jason Lowe _(referee/announcer)_  
Jon Pegg _(Jimmy’s corner man)_  
Justin Baker _(opponent’s agent)_  
Stacy Buckley _(ring walker)_  
Paul Brown _(vicar)_  
Sonia Beck _(Kristina)_  

UK 2017  
91 mins  
<br>
**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

