---
layout: post
title: After Life<br> Season 3
published: true
date: 2022-01-06
readtime: true
categories: ['TV PREVIEWS']
tags: [Comedy, Drama]
metadata: 'UK 2021, 44 mins<br> Director: Ricky Gervais'
pdf: '2022-01-06-after-life-3.pdf'
---

_+ discussion with Ricky Gervais, Penelope Wilton and Diane Morgan_

_After Life_, the critically acclaimed comedy-drama created by and starring Ricky Gervais returns for its final series with six new episodes. Set in the small fictitious town of Tambury, the show follows Tony, a writer for the local newspaper whose life is upended after his wife dies from cancer. Whilst still struggling with immense grief for his wife, Tony starts to realise that making other people feel good is what can give him hope and a reason to live. After all, every end is a new beginning.<br>

**Ricky Gervais**<br>
Considered one of the most influential British comedians since Charlie Chaplin, (he received the Charlie Chaplin Britannia Award for Excellence in Comedy 2016 BAFTA/LA) Ricky Gervais is the creator and star of _The Office_, _Extras_, _Derek_, and the critically acclaimed recent Netflix hit _After Life_.

Gervais has won countless awards, and has enjoyed huge critical success for the outstanding first two series of _After Life_, with the third due to launch on Netflix on 14 January 2022. His hit series _The Office_ is the most successful British comedy of all time, shown in more than 90 countries with eight remakes.

Following the global success of his Netflix stand-up special _Humanity_ – which was his first in 7 years – Gervais returned to stages once in again in 2019 with his latest stand-up show _SuperNature_. The tour included 15 nights at the prestigious London Palladium, two nights at Wembley Arena, as well as many sold out venues around the world.

Ricky has hosted the Golden Globes awards five times, in 2010, 2011, 2012, 2016 and 2020.

**Penelope Wilton**<br>
Dame Penelope Wilton DBE is one of the UK’s most renowned stage and screen actors. Best known for her role in _Downton Abbey_ as Isobel Crawley, she became a household name appearing alongside Richard Briers in the 1984 BBC sitcom _Ever Decreasing Circles_. Other TV credits include playing Homily in _The Borrowers_ and Harriet Jones in _Doctor Who_ and Anne in Ricky Gervais’ _After Life_.

Penelope has had an extensive career on stage, receiving six Olivier Award nominations, and winning in 2015 for her performance in _Taken at Midnight_.

Her film appearances include _Calendar Girls_, _Shaun of the Dead_, Woody Allen’s _Match Point_, _Pride & Prejudice_, _The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel_,  
_The History Boys_, and _Eternal Beauty_. She is currently filming _The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry_.

Wilton was appointed an OBE in the 2004 New Year Honours and was elevated to become a DBE in the 2016 Birthday Honours for services to drama.

**Diane Morgan**<br>
Diane is a BAFTA nominated actor, writer and director.

She writes, directs and stars in her own original comedy _Mandy_. The pilot aired in 2019 and following its success was subsequently commissioned for two full series and a Christmas Special, the second series is currently airing on BBC Two.

As an actor Diane is probably best known for her incarnation of professional dim-wit ‘Philomena Cunk’, who originated on _Charlie Brooker’s Weekly Wipe_. Due of the overwhelming popularity of the character the BBC commissioned two comedy specials and a series fronted by Philomena; BAFTA nominated _Cunk on Shakespeare_, festive special _Cunk on Christmas_ and 5-part series _Cunk on Britain_, all of which aired on BBC Two. She will be returning to our screens reprising the role of Cunk later this year with new series _Cunk on Earth_ for BBC Two and Netflix.

Diane stars as regular roles in several hit comedy series including Ricky Gervais’ _After Life_ (Netflix); Sarah Kendall’s _Frayed_ (Sky/HBO Max); _Motherland_ (BBC); _The Cockfields_ series 1 (Gold) and _Rovers_ (Sky). Other recent TV credits include comedy specials _Death to 2020_ and _Death to 2021_ starring alongside Hugh Grant, Samuel L Jackson, and Stockard Channing for Netflix and _Intelligence_ for Sky. Diane is also due to feature in _Sandman_ (Netflix) and _Inside No. 9_ (BBC) both due to be released later this year.<br>


**AFTER LIFE (Season 3)**<br>
_Written and Directed by:_ Ricky Gervais<br>
_©:_ Netflix Worldwide Entertainment, LLC.<br>
_A_ Netflix _series_<br>
_Production Company:_ Derek Productions<br>
_Filmed with the support of:_ British Film Institute, British Film Commission, UK Government’s Creative Sector Tax Relief<br>
_Created and Executive Produced by:_ Ricky Gervais<br>
_Production Manager:_ Alison Aird<br>
_Line Producer:_ Hussain Casey-Ahmed<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Daniel Rivett<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Phillip Trow<br>
_First Assistant Director:_ Matthew Gallagher<br>
_Location Manager:_ Darren Pratt<br>
_Casting by:_ Tracey  Gillham<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Martin  Hawkins<br>
_A Camera Operator:_ Martin Hawkins<br>
_Editor:_ Mark  Williams<br>
_Post-production Supervisor:_ Charlotte Dean<br>
_Visual Effects:_ JAMVFX<br>
_Production Designer:_ Richard  Drew<br>
_Art Director:_ Jo White<br>
_Property Master:_ Craig Cheeseman<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Lindsey  McClean<br>
_Hair & Make-up Designer:_ Roo  Maurice<br>
_Original Music Composed by:_ Andy  Burrows<br>
_Sound Recordist:_ Caroline Singh<br>
_Boom Operators:_ Laura Fairbanks, Stephen Lee<br>
_Dubbing Mixer:_ Glenn Calder<br>
_Sound Effects Editors:_ Jack Gillies, Daniel Batt<br>
_Dialogue Editor:_ Steve Berezai<br>
_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Ray De-Haan<br>
_Animal Handler:_ Stuntdogs & Animals Ltd<br>
_Filmed at:_ Troubadour Theatre Wembley<br>
_Covid Supervisor_: Simon Marriott<br>

**Cast**<br>
Ricky Gervais _(Tony)_<br>
Tom Basden _(Matt)_<br>
Tony Way _(Lenny)_<br>
Diane Morgan _(Kath)_<br>
Kerry Godliman _(Lisa)_<br>
Ashley Jensen _(Emma)_<br>
Penelope Wilton _(Anne)_<br>
Jo Hartley _(June)_<br>
Joe Wilkinson _(postman)_<br>
David Earl _(Brian)_<br>
Ethan Lawrence _(James)_<br>
Laura Patch _(Jill)_<br>
Colin Hoult (_Ken_ _Otley)_<br>
Kath Hughes _(Coleen)_<br>
Michelle Greenidge _(Valerie)_<br>
Peter Egan _(Paul)_<br>
Rob Woodhall _(Colin)_<br>
Elsie Fallon _(Emma’s colleague)_<br>
Kate Robbins _(Penny Spencer-Wright)_<br>
Steve Brody _(Geoff)_<br>
Jo Enright _(Vera)_<br>
Wendy Albiston _(Brian’s ex-wife)_<br>
Ricky Grover _(Micky the Gypsy)_<br>
Tommy Finnegan _(George)_<br>
Thomas Bastable _(Robbie)_<br>
Marc Cass _(bad driver)_<br>
Dave Hill _(old man in care home)_<br>
Zak Douglas _(estate agent)_<br>
Anti _(Brandy the dog)_<br>

UK 2021©<br>
Episode 1 & 2 44 mins<br>
<br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**TV Preview: Afterlife Season 3 + Q&A with Ricky Gervais and cast**<br>
Thu 6 Jan 18:15<br>
**Oliver Stone in Conversation**<br>
Fri 14 Jan 18:20<br>
**Natural Born Killers**<br>
Fri 14 Jan 20:30<br>
**Fresh Meat 10th Anniversary: Q&A with cast and creatives**<br>
Sat 15 Jan 18:15<br>
**Mark Kermode Live in 3D at the BFI**<br>
Mon 17 Jan 18:10<br>
**Preview: The Souvenir Part II + Q&A with writer-director Joanna Hogg**<br>
Mon 17 Jan 20:30<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera Preview: Amulet + Q&A with writer-director Romola Garai**<br>
Fri 21 Jan 18:00<br>
**African Odysseys presents: UK Premiere: A Bruddah’s Mind Cabeça de Nego + Q&A with director Déo Cardoso**<br>
Sat 22 Jan 14:00<br>
**Silent Cinema presents: South: Sir Ernest Shackleton’s Glorious Epic of the Antarctic + live score**<br>
Thu 27 Jan 19:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  
<br>

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
