---
layout: post
title: Clock
published: true
date: 2022-07-07
readtime: true
categories: ['PREVIEW']
tags: [Drama, Music, Romance]
metadata: 'UK 2021, 86 mins<br> Director: Lola Atkins'
pdf: '2022-07-07-clock.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A_

Screening on the opening night of the I Will Tell International Festival is this coming-of-age romantic drama, set against the underground drum ‘n’ bass, acid and house music scene of ’90s London, and produced by Jason Matthewson. Sarah-Jane is a young aspiring jazz singer from Bournemouth who moves to London to embark on a music career. Not long in town, she falls for the handsome Airbeats, but also sinister music producer Russell-D, who represents a darker side to the music industry.  
**bfi.org.uk**

_Clock_ is written and directed by Lola Atkins and features a diverse, female-led cast and crew. It’s Atkins’ directorial feature film debut.

The feature stars Izzy Jones (_Distant_), Erika Alexander (_Abattoir_, _The Wives in the Attic_), Aron Von Andrian (_Masters of the Air_) and Steven Michael-O’Hara (_Frenemies_). Violetta D’Agata (_It’s the Blackness_) was director of photography.

_Clock_ is produced by Jason Matthewson (_That’s Just Me_, _Suppression_) for EWAV Works in association with film and TV production company The Old Film Farm.

‘We’re excited to be working with Jason on his film _Clock_,’ said Trinity Creative Partnership’s Andy Taylor. ‘We always like to support British independent film makers, and this film deserves to be seen by as wide an audience as possible’.  
**K.J. Yossman, _Variety_, 27 June 2022**  

**Lola Atkins**  
Lola Atkins is a Director, Screenwriter and Producer.

Born in Hackney, London. She majored in Microbiology and Immunology from King’s College, London. While working within the pharmaceutical industry, she teamed up with a Producer partner and joined the newly established SKY TV broadcast channel ‘BABETV’, developed/produced new content and worked within the Camera department for the broadcaster.

Beginning her filmmaking career, she launched her own production house, ‘EWAV WORKS’, writing, directing and producing short films, and delivered Animation and Film Production training workshops to schools, colleges, and juvenile offenders in prisons.

Lola directed an award-winning 2003 drama film titled _Hush_, which was screened at the Short Film Corner in Festival De Cannes, and The BFM International Film Festival; the 2019 short thriller _The Likelihood_; and short drama _Beats_.

Also, Executive produced several productions psycho-thriller _Stalker_, animation _Being Red_, thriller _Bind Us Together_ and the documentary _Citizens Today_. Lola’s production house, EWAV WORKS, also delivers motion images production training.

After a long hiatus from filmmaking to spend time with her family, she returned with directorial feature film debut _Clock_, scheduled for release in 2022, and is developing her next feature psychological thriller with her next feature a US production company.  
**filmfreeway.com**

**CLOCK (AKA PURPLE BEATZ)**    
_Written and Directed:_ Lola Atkins  
_©:_ EWAV Works  
_An_ EWAV Works _production_  
_In association with:_ The Old Film Farm  
_Executive Producers:_ Lola Atkins  
_Produced by:_ Lola Atkins, Jason Matthewson  
_Location Manager:_ Linzy Attenborough  
_Script Supervisor:_ Marta Hernani-Fernandez  
_Casting:_ Nina Malone  
_First Assistant Director:_ James Ho  
_Cinematographer:_ Violetta D’Agata  
_Editor:_ Nele Mertens  
_Production Designer:_ Vasco Durao  
_Set Decorator:_ Leanne Ivey  
_Costume Designer:_ Anna Bevan  
_Music:_ Rachel Foxx  
_Production Sound Recordist:_ Kirstie Howell  
_Supervising Sound Editors:_ Otavio Santos, Felipy Andrade  
_Re-recording Mixer:_ Felipy Andrade  

**Cast**  
Izzy Jones _(Sarah-Jane)_  
Erica Alexander _(Deedee)_  
Steven Michael-O’Hara _(Airbeats)_  
Aron von Andrian _(Russell Douglas)_  
Tedroy Newell _(Richard)_  

UK 2021©  
86 min  

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

