---
layout: post
title: The Outfit + Q&A
published: false
date: 2022-03-02
readtime: true
categories: ['GLASGOW FILM FESTIVAL']
tags: [Drama, Crime]
metadata: 'USA/UK 2022, 105 mins<br> Director: Graham Moore'
pdf: '2022-03-02-outfit.pdf'
---

_+ pre-recorded Q&A with director Graham Moore and actor Mark Rylance_

**Director’s Statement**  
My grandfather Charlie was the most profoundly decent person I’ve ever known. After my parents split up — I was seven, my brother was four — Charlie, who was my mom’s dad, took on a huge parental role in our lives. He took us to museums, instilling a love for science that would eventually inspire me to write _The Imitation Game_. He taught me how to tie a tie. He would take me to the movies and then walk out of the theatre if anything bad happened to a child on screen. He didn’t drink, he didn’t smoke, and his only vice was a scoop of chocolate ice cream every afternoon. (But only one!) He was a loving and devoted husband to my grandmother for over 60 years. He was a family doctor in a small New Jersey town who frequently had generations of patients within a single family. He was a born healer, so scrupulously law-abiding that he wouldn’t even drive above the speed limit. He was honest, forthright, and just an all-around mensch.

And yet one of his patients was the notorious mobster Jerry Catena.

My kind, gentle grandfather cared for one of the leaders of the brutal Genovese crime family. My grandma would beg him to drop the mobster as a patient. But Charlie always refused: ‘He’s never been anything but a gentleman to me.’ My grandma was adamant: ‘This is a man who has killed people.’ But to my grandfather, Jerry Catena wasn’t a vicious killer. He was a human being in need of medical care. My grandfather, after all, had taken an oath.

I didn’t think of my grandfather instantly when, in 2015, my dear friend Johnathan McClain said to me, ‘how come nobody’s ever made a film about a Savile Row tailor?’ But I did think that this could be an intriguing character around whom we might build a film. Johnathan and I were both fascinated by the psychology of someone who spends years – even decades! – perfecting a craft that is equal parts esoteric and precise. Together, we grew obsessed. We spent years researching: talking to tailors, learning about the history of suits, eventually spending time in the basement of a Savile Row shop. But as we honed our lead character, there was one question we couldn’t quite figure out: What was our story?

And that’s when we found a single sentence buried deep in big book about 20th-century suit-making. We learned that the first bug the FBI ever planted in its history was planted in Chicago in 1956… inside a tailor shop.

And that’s when it all clicked into place.

What if our tailor was a man like my grandfather? A good and decent person working in the service of a wicked killer?

Now _that_ sounded like a story.

To me, _The Outfit_ is a thriller about complicity. How long can you work for a monster and turn a blind eye to his monstrousness? At what point do you become not a spectator but an accomplice? What stories do we tell ourselves to justify our own inaction in the face of injustice?

And what would it take to finally spur us to stand up and do something?

**About the Production**  
‘It all started with Leonard Burling,’ says _The Outfit_  writer and director Graham Moore. ‘Before we had a story or gangsters or guns, we had the character of Leonard.’

Moore, an Oscar-winning screenwriter and bestselling novelist, says he and co-writer Johnathan McClain have always been fascinated by people who spend their lives perfecting the art of something so esoteric that most people can’t even tell they’re experts at it. ‘Johnathan, who has forgotten more than I’ve ever known about the history of men’s fashion, suggested we write about a Savile Row tailor and I got excited. There’s a loneliness to devoting your life to learning something that specific, which is such a fascinating psychology to me. What’s it like to spend decades of your life training to be the best in the world at this relatively obscure occupation?’

Moore and McClain had anticipated setting the film in London until they happened upon one sentence in their research that would change the path of their imaginary tailor. ‘We discovered that the FBI had planted its very first bug in a tailor’s shop in Chicago in the 1950s,’ explains McClain. ‘It was an intriguing set-up. We wanted to find out what really happened.’

Although the actual incident turned out not to be as compelling as they had hoped, they believed it was an intriguing premise, and Chicago, once synonymous with organised crime and big-time gangsters like Al Capone and Frank Nitti, seemed like the perfect setting. ‘We took the basic concept, a tailor shop that’s being used as a drop spot for gangsters that the FBI is interested in, and spun off our own original story from there,’ says Moore. ‘The characters are fictional but inspired by some of the more colourful gangland figures of the time.’

Capone was the kingpin of a sprawling crime syndicate known as ‘The Chicago Outfit’, which continued to prosper long after he was out of the picture. Moore and Graham based the elusive underworld overlords the Boyles are attempting to impress on this real organisation. ‘_The Outfit_ is obviously a double entendre,’ says McClain. ‘Maybe even a triple entendre. The outfits that Leonard creates, this crime organisation that is a spectre in the background of the film and how we outfit ourselves with the tools we need to go through life.’

As they investigated the history of gangs in Chicago, Moore and McClain became increasingly fascinated with the era and the rise of organised crime in mid-century America. ‘It’s like a United Nations of crime,’ says McClain. ‘People can operate independently in different cities as a part of this over-arching network. The Boyles want to be part of ‘The Outfit’. We hear about them in the movie, but we never see them.’

From their modest premise – the life of an elite London tailor in Chicago – Moore and McClain built a wildly creative thriller, adding treachery, deceit, a pair of vicious mob families, a deadly turf war and a surprising secret hidden in plain sight.

As Leonard, their protagonist, came into sharper focus, they envisioned a mild-mannered professional adept at staying under the radar. They rounded out the cast of characters with a brutal crime boss, his impetuous son, an ambitious underling, a mysterious rival gang leader and a local girl eager to get away from it all. At that point, says Moore, ‘_The Outfit_  became a lethal chess match between all of these different characters.’  
**Production notes**  

**THE OUTFIT**  
_Directed by_: Graham Moore    
_©_: LLC Outfit Distribution  
_Production Companies_: Scoop Productions, Unified Theory  
_Made possible by the support of HM Treasury & DCMS_: Film and TV Production Restart Scheme  
_Presented by_: Focus Features  
_In association with_: FilmNation Entertainment  
_Executive Producers_: Brad Zimmerman, Ashley Fox, Milan Popelka, Alison Cohen, Jonathan McClain  
_Produced by_: Scoop Wasserstein, Amy Jackson, Ben Browning  
_Co-producers_: Elizabeth Siegal, Nell Green  
_Production Manager_: Jack Cornelius Knott  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Eszter Telegdy  
_Financial Controller_: Dougal Cadiou  
_Location Unit Manager_: Jon Davis  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Emma Zee  
_Post-production Co-ordinator_: Scott P. Fraser  
_1st Assistant Directors_: George Every, George Every  
_2nd Assistant Director_: James R. Kipping  
_3rd Assistant Director_: Stewart Allen-Smith  
_Script Supervisor_: Beverley Winston  
_Additional Casting (UK)_: Shaheen Baig  
_Casting Associate (UK)_: Michelle Giovanni  
_Written by_: Graham Moore, Jonathan McClain  
_Cinematography by_: Dick Pope  
_A Camera Operator_: Dick Pope  
_B Camera Operator_: Lucy Bristow  
_Digital Imaging Technician_: Kevin Ball  
_Gaffer_: Andy Long  
_Best Boy_: Paul Brewster  
_Key Grip_: Colin Strachan  
_Stills Photographers_: Nick Wall, Rob Youngson  
_Visual Effects by_: Automatik  
_Special Effects by_: Fizz Bang Wallop Ltd  
_Editor_: William Goldenberg  
_Additional Editing by_: Stephen M. Rickert Jr  
_Assistant Editor_: Wali Goins  
_Production Designer_: Gemma Jackson  
_Art Director_: Richard Selway  
_Standby Art Director_: Rachel Aulton  
_Set Decorator_: Tonja Schürmann  
_Graphic Designer_: Laura Grant  
_Draughtsman_: Matilda Beard, Sam Sparks  
_Storyboard Artists_: Colin Decker, Douglas Ingram  
_Production Buyer_: Misli Akdag  
_Propmaster_: Alan Bailey  
_[Art Department] Researcher_: Karl Aussia  
_Construction Co-ordinator_: Seamus Hawthorne  
_Construction Manager_: Jo Hawthorne  
_Costume Designers_: Sophie O’Neill, Zac Posen  
_Costume Supervisor_: Ashleigh Lennox  
_Hair & Make-up Designer_: Christine Blundell  
_Hair & Make-up Supervisor_: Lesa Warrener  
_Hair & Make-up Artist_: Chloë Meddings  
_Prosthetics by_: KM Effects Ltd  
_Title Designer_: Matt Curtis  
_Music by_: Alexandre Desplat  
_Cello Solo_: Cyril Lacrouts  
_Jazz Bass_: Riccardo Del Fra, Darryl Hall  
_Flutes, Piano_: Alexandre Desplat  
_Orchestrations_: Alexandre Desplat, Jean-Pascal Beintus, Sylvain Morizet  
_Music Editor_: Peter Clarke  
_Recorded by_: Alexandre Tanguy  
_Mixed by_: Peter Cobbin, Kirsty Whalley  
_Production Sound Mixer_: William Whale  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Steve Single, William Miller  
_Supervising Sound Editors_: Rachael Tate, Olivier Tarney  
_Sound Effects Editor_: Dawn Gough  
_Foley Artists_: Andrea King, Oliver Ferris  
_Foley Recording Mixer_: Adam Mendez  
_Foley Editor_: Sophia Hardman  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Glenn Marks  
_Stand-in for Mark Rylance_: Kent Goldfinch  
_Tailoring Adviser_: Campbell Carey  
_Dialect Coach_: Kate DeVore  
_Dialect Coach to Mark Rylance_: Martin McKellan  
_Armourers_: Alex Francis, Noel Francis  

**Cast**  
Mark Rylance _(Leonard)_  
Zoey Deutch _(Mable Sean)_  
Johnny Flynn _(Francis)_  
Dylan O’Brien _(Richie)_  
Nikki Amuka-Bird _(Madame Violet La Fontaine)_  
Simon Russell Beale _(Roy Boyle)_  
Alan Mehdizadeh _(Monk)_  
John Gumley-Mason _(tall customer)_  
Stephen Knox _(stocky customer)_  
Steve Chatfield _(gangster 1)_  
Michael Forejtek _(gangster 2)_  
Jonathan McClain _(FBI agent)_  
Lauris Karklins _(gangster 3)_  
William Keetch _(gangster 4)_  
Scoop Wasserstein _(customer)_  
Ryan Hall _(gangster 5)_  
Chiedu Agborh _(La Fontaine bodyguard 1)_  
Michael Addo _(La Fontaine bodyguard 2)_  

USA/UK 2022  
105 mins  
<br>
**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Preview: Rebel Dread + Q&A with Don Letts**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 18:00<br>
**Member Picks: Evita**<br>
Fri 4 Mar 17:50<br>
**Doctor Who: Revelation of the Daleks**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 12:00<br>
**Mark Kermode Live in 3D at the BFI**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 18:10<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera Preview: True Things + Q&A with Director Harry Wootliff**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 20:35<br>
**Hive+ pre-recorded Q&A with filmmakers**<br>
Tue 8 Mar 18:15<br>
**TV Preview: Gentleman Jack Series 2 + Q&A with writer Sally Wainwright and actors Suranne Jones and Sophie Rundle**<br>
Wed 9 Mar 18:10<br>
**GFF International Women’s Day Gala: Happening (L’evenement) + Pre-recorded Q&A with Director Audrey Diwan**<br>
Wed 9 Mar 20:40<br>
**TV Preview: Inside No. 9 + Q&A with creators Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton, and executive producer Adam Tandy**<br>
Fri 11 Mar 20:40<br>
**GFF Closing Gala: Murina**<br>
Sun 13 Mar 19:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
