---
layout: post
title: The Falls
published: true
date: 2022-10-22
readtime: true
categories: ['FRAMES OF MIND<br> THE FILMS OF PETER GREENAWAY']
tags: [Experimental]
metadata: 'UK 1980, 185 mins<br> Director: Peter Greenaway'
pdf: '2022-10-22-belly-of-an-architect.pdf'
---

A record of a cataclysm that never was, _The Falls_ is the epic, lengthy but highly-rewarding culmination of Greenaway’s experiments through the 1970s, channelling sci-fi, mockumentary and the writing of magic realist Jorge Luis Borges. The ‘Violent Unknown Event’ precipitates a catalogue of disastrous ornithological relationships across 92 interlinking short films, evoking a world where birds dominate and human relationships must be re-mapped.  
**bfi.org.uk**

_The Falls_ is a splendidly witty three-hour trawl through 92 potted biographies of people who have been victims of a VUE – a Violent Unknown Event – and it is haunted by Greenaway’s alter ego Tulse Luper.

One problem with Greenaway’s ever-extending work is that it forces you to become a disciple or to walk away. How much time can anyone devote to the minutiae of his fascinations? The answer for me – at least with these early works – is much more time than I expected. Greenaway’s work was imitating the information age before it had even hit its stride, but it also has its old-world charm.  
**Nick James, _Sight & Sound_, December 2003**  

**A contemporary review**  
92 surnames, all with the prefix ‘Fall’, from Falla to Fall waste, have been picked out of the latest edition of the Standard Directory of the Violent Unknown Event (VUE), and the case histories of these randomly chosen subjects, ‘a cross-section of people with very varied biographies’, offer an admittedly partial history of the world but the only practicable history there is.

_The Falls_ gives an alphabetical account (in English, though there are 92 versions) of each of these subjects. Some of them belong to the same family; others cannot be discussed because their ‘case’ is _sub judice_; a few are in fact ‘fictional’ characters and therefore inadmissible. These short biographies (hardly longer than five minutes at most and sometimes much shorter) vary in their detail, narrative style and content; some use voice-ever exclusively, others include interviews, still others are enacted, but most impart information as to the subject’s language (no two subjects speak the same language), the effect of the VUE on the subject, and the subject’s view on the question of the responsibility of birds.

Admirers of _A Walk through H_ and _Vertical Features Remake_ will recognise _The Falls_ as an _echt_ Greenaway movie in everything except perhaps its length. The director is an enumerator and a collator of statistics, a cataloguer, a cartographer and a ‘classification theorist’, all of these roles being ascribed to him towards the end of _The Falls_. He is a monument of erudition (most of it fake) and a master of innuendo and the allusive joke, a writer of summaries and synopses, a reworker of other people’s material (notably Tulse Luper’s) and, perhaps above all, an ornithologist. _The Falls_ escapes being pettifogging because it is fictional – the mind that created the film is at least as interesting as the film itself – and, alas, because it is LONG (repetition, ultimately, is its own reward and _Vertical Features Remake_ was not repetitive enough). At a guess, Greenaway has two sources, Wittgenstein’s ‘Die Welt ist alles, was der Fall ist’ (‘The World is all that is the case’) and Foucault’s preface to _Les Mots et les choses_ where it is said that the history of the order of things is that of the conditions which make a taxonomy possible.

But these are fleeting allusions, to be taken no more or less seriously than all the other varieties of jokes with which the film is stuffed. Some of these relate to birds (the Goldhawk Road is a recurrent location, references abound to the Raven public house at Stamford Brook, one character’s car number plate is NID 92, Arris Fallacie is said to have been born in the Canary Islands, etc .... ); some have to do with the connotations of all 92 inherently improbable surnames (whether through unconventional orthography – Fallacie, Fallaize, Fallanx – or because they are apparently contradictory – Loosely Fallbute – or because they are stunningly appropriate – Coppice Fallbateo the ‘art historian’ fascinated by the suspended egg in the _Brera Madonna_); yet other jokes involve spotting the fleeting appearances by luminaries of Independent Film Culture (or recognising their voices), or calculating that a certain long shot from the South Bank of the Thames must have been set up on top of the National Film Theatre.

But for all his cosmopolitan baggage, Greenaway is also, and perhaps essentially, the heir to a very English Utopian tradition so strongly represented by Tolkien and Mervyn Peake. Like his illustrious predecessors, Greenaway has ambitions to create a total and self-sufficient world, complete in every detail, with its language and nomenclature, its maps and place names, and with the Violent Unknown Event to serve as its Genesis Myth. Hence a certain whimsy in _The Falls_ which is not to every audience’s taste. The question inevitably arises whether _The Falls_ is truly an advance on _A Walk through H_, many of whose themes and devices it simply expands on. For example, the freedom to use more than a rostrum camera and voice-over commentary obviously makes the visual repertoire of _The Falls_ a great deal richer, but the heavy directorial technique (emphasising commentary and montage) to some extent denies this potential richness.

The film is extremely difficult to look at, not because it is dull but because it is long, and it is sometimes positively tiresome, principally because of its whimsical obsessiveness. Additional viewings would undoubtedly dispel these _longueurs_ by removing the need (or desire) to apprehend a totality – for after all, and this fact is extremely disturbing, its length and content are gratuitous and arbitrary. Here are 92 biographies, but this is only the taxonomy of a taxidermist, whereas the ambition is the world.  
**Jill Forbes, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, February 1981**  

**THE FALLS**  
_Director_: Peter Greenaway  
_Production Company_: British Film Institute Production Board  
_Screenplay_: Peter Greenaway  
_Photography_: Mike Coles, John Rosenberg  
_Additional Photography_: Erica Stevenson, Francine Winham, Peter Greenaway  
_Rostrum Camera_: Bert Walker  
_Lighting/Grips_: Glyn Fielding, Charlie Giblett  
_Camera Assistants_: David Scott, Andrew Speller, David Bough  
_Stills Photography_: Tony Poulter, Michael Nyman, Ian Lake, Donald Lazenby, Ripon Carter Archive  
_Editor_: Peter Greenaway  
_Music_: Michael Nyman  
_Additional Music_: Brian Eno, John Hyde, Keith Pendlebury  
_Sound Recording_: Malcolm Hirst, David Lawton, Diana Ruston, Digby Rumsey, Mick Audsley  
_Sound Re-recording_: Tony Anscombe  
_Translator_: Aet Nyman, Brian Sweetman, Sharon Maconie, Carole Myer, Tom Hunsinger, Maria Almendra, Gabor Vernon, Colin Cantlie, Lesley Wilson, Aad Wirtz, Elizabeth Ledward  

**Cast**  
Colin Cantlie, Nicolas Hayley, Peter Westley, Hilary Thompson, Steve Saunders, Aad Wirtz, Sheila Canfield, Ann Barnard, Michael Murray, Adam Leys, Barbara Grant, Lorna Poulter, Serena Macbeth, Ben Grove, Patricia Carr, Martin Burrows, Doug Wootton, Adam Leys, Rory Allam, Mary Howard, Ian Mitchell, Sheila Canfield, Keith Thompson, Evelyn Owen, Lucy Skeaping, Hilary Thompson, Carole Myer, Monica Hyde, Colleen Thomas, Neil Hopkins, Dewi Thomas, Peter Sacre, Keith Pendlebury, Robert Warby, Marcia Pendlebury, Brothers Quay, Tom Hunsinger, Martin Burrows, Maggie Palmer, Adejbo Nkasaggi, Maurice Tarling, Pat Whitney, Alicia Webb, Sandra Williams, Garry Morris, Richard Jenkins, Serena Macbeth, John Wilson, Lesley Wilson, Gabor Vernon, Rod Stoneman, Aet Nyman, Teet Toome, Reeta Toome, Artur Toome, Martin Pawky, Jeremy Tarling, Graham Jones, Chris Auty, Glyn Fielding, Chris Rodriguez, John Lea, Alice Skillings, Michele Osborn, Simon Fea, Kenneth Breese, Edith Lazenby, Nigel Algar, Nita Bird, Cedric Pheasant, Lucy Finch, Donald Lazenby, Terry Lansbury, Freida Jones, Pat Hopkins, Peter Sainsbury, Ian Lake, David Cowper, Sarah Cowper, Herbert Mullinger, Christine Metcalfe, Christopher Metcalfe, Lilian Mullinger, Marion Brame, Wendy Evans, Bob Godfrey, Mick O'Connor, Raina James, Chris Thomas, Alderich Asenbryl, Dorothy Bradley, Udi Eichler, Cathy Lake, David Lawton, Brigitte Kahn, Glennys Williams, John Hyde, Christopher Williams, Gillian Tarling, Russel Flint, Howard Milner, J.J. Czipri, Lucia Apel, Molly Nyman, Rachel Penfold, Simon De Quincey, Carlene Crow, Colin Hasp, Colin Berwick, Anthony Sloman, Peter Nage  

UK 1980  
185 mins  
<br>
**FRAMES OF MIND: THE FILMS OF PETER GREENAWAY**  
**A Zed & Two Noughts**  
Tue 18 Oct 18:10; Sat 5 Nov 17:40; Sat 12 Nov 17:40; Mon 21 Nov 20:40; Sun 27 Nov 12:15  
**Peter Greenaway: Frames of Mind Season Introduction**  
Wed 19 Oct 18:10  
**The Belly of an Architect**  
Wed 19 Oct 20:30; Fri 18 Nov 18:20; Tue 22 Nov 18:10; Sat 26 Nov 15:30  
**The Falls**  
Sat 22 Oct 13:50; Sun 6 Nov 14:40  
**The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover**  
Sun 23 Oct 15:30 (+ intro by Justin Johnson, Lead Programmer); Sat 12 Nov 14:55; Mon 28 Nov 17:50  
**Drowning by Numbers**  
Sun 23 Oct 18:00; Sat 19 Nov 14:30; Sun 27 Nov 18:00  
**Peter Greenaway Shorts Programme 1**  
Mon 24 Oct 18:10; Thu 10 Nov 20:40  
**Experimental Sound and Vision: Found Sounds, Lyrical Loops and Landscapes**  
Thu 27 Oct 18:15; Thu 17 Nov 18:15 (+ intro by author and musician David Toop)  
**Prospero’s Books**  
Tue 1 Nov 17:40; Sun 20 Nov 18:00  
**Peter Greenaway: Pioneer of Cinema**  
Sat 5 Nov 12:00-17:00  
**The Unreliable Narrator: Adventures in Storytelling, Documentary and Misinformation**  
Sun 6 Nov 12:40; Fri 25 Nov 21:00  
**A TV Dante: Cantos 1-8**  
Tue 15 Nov 18:20  
**The Baby of Mâcon**  
Wed 16 Nov 20:30; Fri 25 Nov 18:00; Mon 28 Nov 20:30  
**The Pillow Book**  
Fri 18 Nov 20:30; Thu 24 Nov 20:30; Tue 29 Nov 17:40  
**8½ Women**  
Sun 20 Nov 12:50; Wed 30 Nov 20:35  
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
