---
layout: post
title: Divines
published: true
date: 2022-03-02
readtime: true
categories: ['SEEN & HEARD']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'France/Qatar 2016, 105 mins<br> Director: Houda Benyamina'
pdf: '2022-03-02-divines.pdf'
---

**Director Houda Benyamina on ‘Divines’**

In French director Houda Benyamina’s feature-length debut _Divines_, Dounia (Oulaya Amamra) and Maimouna (Déborah Lukumuena) are schoolfriends who turn to a life of crime in a bid to escape the _banlieues_. With their physical comedy and contrasting little-and-large builds, Dounia and Maimouna have been described by Benyamina as her very own Laurel and Hardy. But an even more accurate comparison might be Robert De Niro and Harvey Keitel in _Mean Streets_ (1973), both in the way their respective straight man and comic relief relationship plays out, and in the pathos and melodrama at the core of their friendship.

The self-schooled director, who was previously an acting coach at the workshop she founded in 2006 (1000 Visages), received the Camera d’Or for best first feature at Cannes this year. Inspired by the restless energy that fuelled the Paris riots in 2005 and touched by a documentary she once saw that featured two female prison inmates dancing in front of the police, Benyamina decided to channel the disillusionment and dissent of the city’s underclass into a restless story of personal protest. An often gritty urban drama, _Divines_ may invite comparison with recent _banlieue_-set films like Céline Sciamma’s _Girlhood_ (2014) or Mathieu Kassovitz’s _La Haine_ (1995), but Benyamina’s film, with its tough-talking heroines and fiery climax, is unabashedly populist in tone.

_You’ve said Laurel and Hardy inspired the characters. Were there any  other influences?_

When I was a child my best friend looked physically a bit like Maimouna’s character. We often messed about and found ourselves in quite funny burlesque situations, so I wanted to recreate that.

_Does that mean you were like Dounia when you were younger?_

When I was younger – I mean, I still do – I felt like a bit of an outsider, which fed into feelings of injustice, of rebellion, of wanting to assert myself. The need for recognition and acceptance is where I recognise myself in Dounia’s character. Dounia doesn’t want to just exist in the world; she wants to be looked at. She’s also a character who looks at men.

_Was the female gaze something you actively tried to explore?_

That’s exactly something I wanted to show. Grace and sensuality are things that men have as much as women – and women can express desire and sexuality in the same way men can.

_How did you come up with the scene that sees the girls drive an  imaginary Ferrari?_

The way I develop a story is an ongoing back and forth between script and performance. For the Ferrari scene and the scene where they all shout, ‘Money money money’ – that’s all inspired by my little brother, who told me a dream he had. It made me think that that’s what young people these days dream about.  I love Ken Loach, but I didn’t really want to go for social realism. I wanted to inject a bit of magic.

_How did you find the two lead actresses and build the chemistry  between them?_

Oulaya [Amamra] is actually my little sister. I didn’t really want her to play this part because I didn’t feel she was right for the role because she had a very different upbringing to me. We put her in a private Catholic school and she did ballet… She’s very feminine, very sensitive and she didn’t have this tough exterior that Dounia should have. But she really proved herself; she took up boxing, she became quite insolent, she was expelled from her school! She increasingly embodied Dounia’s character. Also, I trained her as an actress when she was young – I used to teach theatre, so [I knew] she was  technically skilled.

The actors were immersed in the universe that they were made to act in. They slept in a Roma camp, they took up boxing and I made them spend a lot of time together, playing with mobile phones and filming each other, so they developed this natural friendship in the end.

_Why did you choose to include mobile phone footage in the opening credits?_

The phones embody how young people communicate today; the way they use Snapchat stories to document and stage their own lives – they’re actors in their own lives. I liked using this device to show the way she falls in act three – aesthetically it was the right thing to do.

_From Dounia’s_ Taxi Driver _imitation to the scene where her body is covered in cash, there are several nods to Scorsese. What were some of your other cinematic reference points?_

My references are from across the world and across the board. Some of my inspiration comes from filmmakers like Ettore Scola, [Pier Paolo] Pasolini, [Jean-Pierre] Melville, and you’re right about the references to Scorsese. His particular interest in the power of money and the power of the sacred [is something] I really identify with.

_This film is being distributed through Netflix. Do you think it’s still important to show films in the cinema?_

When I first heard the Netflix offer I thought, ‘Right, my film’s not going to be screened in cinemas,’ and for me that wasn’t necessarily a good thing. But then I realised what it actually meant to have a film in cinemas, in the jungle that is the world of cinema distribution, where if you don’t have enough entries, enough seats booked, they close you down after two weeks. What the Netflix deal has allowed is for this film to be distributed in 130 countries to 83 million people, and no distributor would’ve been able to do that. I’m not a snob; I really want the film to be seen. And what Netflix has allowed is a real democratisation of film. It’s made it accessible, especially to young people who only really watch their films on tablets or on their phones. And also cinema tends to be quite expensive – I feel it gives people the opportunity to see these films.  
**Interview by Simran Hans, _Sight & Sound_, December 2016**
<br><br>

**DIVINES**  
_Director_: Houda Benyamina  
_Production Company_: Easy Tiger<br>
_Executive Producer:_ Funa Maduka<br>
_Producer:_ Marc-Benoît Créancier<br>
_Casting:_ Pierre-François Créancier,  Sandra Durando<br>
_Screenplay:_ Houda Benyamina, Romain Compingt, Malik Rumeau<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Julien Poupard<br>
_Editors:_ Loïc Lallemand, Vincent Tricon<br>
_Art Director:_ Marion Burger<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Alice Cambournac<br>
_Music:_ Demusmaker<br>
_Music Supervisor:_ Martin Caraux<br>

**Cast**<br>
Oulaya Amamra _(Dounia)_  
Déborah Lukumuena _(Maimouna)_  
Kevin Mishel _(Djigui)_  
Jisca Kalvanda _(Rebecca)_  
Yasin Houicha _(Samir)_  
Majdouline Idriss _(Myriam)_<br>
Bass Dhem _(Mr Camara)_<br>
Mounir Margoum _(Cassandra)_<br>
Farid Larbi _(Reda)_<br>
Mariama Soumaré _(Mrs Camara)_<br>

France/Qatar 2016<br>
105 mins<br>
<br>

**SEEN & HEARD: DARING FEMALE COMING-OF-AGE FILMS**<br>
**Skate Kitchen**<br>
Tue 1 Mar 20:40; Sun 13 Mar 20:45<br>
**Divines**<br>
Wed 2 Mar 20:50; Tue 15 Mar 20:50<br> 
**Jinn**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 17:45; Tue 8 Mar 21:00<br> 
**37 Seconds (37 sekanzu)**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 20:30; Sat 12 Mar 20:45<br> 
**Water Lilies (Naissance des pieuvres)**<br>
Sun 6 Mar 18:45; Mon 14 Mar 20:50<br> 
**Marie Antoinette**<br> 
Tue 8 Mar 18:10 (+ intro by Hannah Strong, Little White Lies Digital Editor and author of Sofia Coppola: Forever Young); Sun 13 Mar 18:00<br> 
**Somersault**<br>
Fri 11 Mar 20:50; Mon 14 Mar 18:10<br>
<br>


**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTMxMjQzMzAyXX0=
-->
