---
layout: post
title: UNIQUE
published: true
date: 2022-02-25
readtime: true
categories: ['BFI EXPANDED - WORLD PREMIERE']
tags: [Multimedia]
metadata: 'UK 2022, 45 mins<br> Director: Tupac Martir'
pdf: '2022-02-25-unique.pdf'
---

Cinematic projections, live music and immersive technology – these are the elements that form UNIQUE, world-renowned artist Tupac Martir’s newest masterpiece, based on the premise of self-reflection and identity.  Combining the heritage of the screen with the endless possibilities of immersive technology, this work aims to form a new performance tradition – namely, Performative-R – by integrating live music, dance, set design, AR, VR and projection. The conductor leads and sculpts the performances of live musicians, dancers, and real-time graphics into a cohesive piece of art, combining the vitality of live improvisation with the nuance of crafted narrative. The audience has three options to experience this immersive concert using either Virtual, Augmented Reality or Projection Mapping to accompany the live audio experience. Immersive technology and art combine to deliver a unique, bespoke performance.

**Tupac Martir** is a multimedia artist and founder of Satore Studio.  His work spans the fields of technology, lighting, projection and video, sound design, music and composition, as well as choreography and costumes.  _Vogue_ described him as ‘the visual designer and creative director behind some of the most important events in the world.’ Martir has provided production design, visuals and lighting direction for the likes of Elton John, Beyoncé, Danny Boyle, the Coachella festival and Serpentine Gallery, and worked on groundbreaking shows for Alexander McQueen, Moschino, Alexander Wang, and Thomas Tait, among others. More recently he directed and produced the award-winning performative reality piece _Cosmos within Us_, and was appointed as trustee for the National Dance Company Wales.
<br><br>

**UNIQUE**  
_Directed by:_ Tupac Martir  
©: Satore Studio  
_Written by:_ Tupac Martir  
_Executive Producer:_ Rubin Shah  
_Producer:_ Amber Reohorn  
_Head of R&D:_ John Rowe  
_Concept by:_ Tupac Martir  
_Production Accountant:_ Nia Taylor  
_Music Director:_ Steven Weston  
_Music Technical Director:_ Andrew Lancaster  
_Composers:_ Steven Weston, Andrew Lancaster

_Production Team_  
_Art Director:_ Harriet Bisley  
_Lead UE Designer:_ Rebecca Mckie Coils  
_UE Designers:_ Yin Ho, Ben Lilley  
_Lead Notch Designer:_ Alyssa Mello  
_Lead Control:_ Filipe Barbosa  
_Developer:_ Rajan Chakravarty Jalem  
_Story Visualisation:_ Paul Tyler  
_Story Developer:_ Galle Mourre

_Live Crew_  
_Conductor/Director:_ Tupac Martir  
_UE Operator:_ Filipe Barbosa  
_Technicians:_ Rajan Chakravarty Jalem,  Rebecca McKie Coils  
_Notch:_ Alyssa Mello  
_Disguise Operator:_ Nadia Babar  
_Camera Operator:_ Mother Brown Films,  Mark Keshishian, Kevin Brown  
_Sound Engineer (Live):_ Hugh Fielding  
_Vocalists (Live):_ Gregory Cox, Kitty Whitelaw  
_Musician Keys (Live):_ Steven Weston  
_Musician Violin (Live):_ Alexandra Finlaison  
_Musician Cello (Live):_ Klara Schumann  
_Musician Guitar (Live):_ Andrew Lancaster  
_Musician Drums (Live):_ John Maiden  
_Musician Bass Guitar (Live):_ Craig Lowe  
_Shadow Dancers (Live):_ Miia Makila,  Akti Konstantinou

_Special Thanks_  
Credit software/hardware Unreal Engine, Notch, Disguise, 8th Day, Heathrow Sound Hire, Heavenue, Universal Pixel, Showforce

With the support of: BFI, BFI LFF Expanded

UK 2022©  
Total running time c.45 mins
<br><br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Preview: Paper & Glue + pre-recorded Q&A with director JR**<br>
Tue 1 Mar 18:00<br>
**The Power of the Dog + Jane Campion in conversation with Noah Baumbach**<br>
Tue 1 Mar 19:15<br>
**GFF Opening Gala: The Outfit + pre-recorded Q&A with director Graham Moore and actor Mark Rylance**<br>
Wed 2 Mar 20:20<br>
**Preview: Rebel Dread + Q&A with Don Letts**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 18:00<br>
**Doctor Who: Revelation of the Daleks**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 12:00<br> 
**Mark Kermode Live in 3D at the BFI**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 18:10<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera Preview: True Things + Q&A with Director Harry Wootliff**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 20:35<br> 
**Hive+ pre-recorded Q&A with filmmakers**<br>
Tue 8 Mar 18:15<br>
**TV Preview: Gentleman Jack Series 2 + Q&A with writer Sally Wainwright and actors Suranne Jones and Sophie Rundle**<br>
Wed 9 Mar 18:10<br> 
**GFF International Women’s Day Gala:  Happening (L’evenement) + Pre-recorded Q&A with Director Audrey Diwan**<br>
Wed 9 Mar 20:40<br>
**TV Preview: Inside No. 9 + Q&A with creators Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton, and executive producer Adam Tandy**<br>
Fri 11 Mar 20:40<br>
**GFF Closing Gala: Murina**<br>
Sun 13 Mar 19:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbOTQzNjQ4MzYyXX0=
-->
