---
layout: post
title: Swan Song
published: true
date: 2022-06-10
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USA 2021, 105 mins<br> Director: Todd Stephens'
pdf: '2022-06-10-swan-song.pdf'
---

**Director’s Statement**  
Back in 1984, I walked into my small-town gay bar for the first time –  The Universal Fruit and Nut Company. There he was, glittering on the dancefloor. Wearing a teal feather boa, fedora and matching pantsuit, ‘Mister Pat’ Pitsenbarger was busting old school moves straight out of Bob Fosse.  I was 17, and Pat was a revelation.

Years later, when I set out to write my autobiographical _Edge of Seventeen_, I immediately thought of Mister Pat. I went back home to hunt him down, only to discover Pat had just suffered an aneurism and was temporarily unable to speak. But his lover David told me stories about how Pat was once the most fabulous hairdresser in Sandusky, Ohio, about his legendary drag performances and about how he used to shop at Kroger’s dressed as Carol Burnett – in 1967! This was a man who always had the courage to be himself, long before that was safe.

The truth is, Mister Pat inspired me to write _Edge of Seventeen_. I wrote a significant ‘Pat’ character as my protagonist’s mentor, but midway through the shoot, the part got cut. I always knew my muse would return someday in my writing, and when he finally did many years later, I looked for Pat again only to learn he just passed away. Sadly, Pat’s legendary hand-beaded rhinestone gowns are all lost to time. Only a shoebox remains – filled with some tarnished jewellery and a half-smoked pack of Mores.

_Swan Song_ is a love letter to the rapidly disappearing ‘gay culture’ of America. As it has become more acceptable to be queer, what used to be a thriving community is rapidly melting back into society. Thanks to assimilation and technology, small-town gay bars like The Universal Fruit and Nut Company are becoming extinct. _Swan Song_ is dedicated to all the forgotten flaming florists and hairdressers who built the gay community and blazed the trail for the rights many of us cling to today. But, above all, for me this film is about learning that it’s never too late to live again.

**Todd Stephens on ‘Swan Song’**

_Can you talk about how your past works have led you to Swan Song?_

_Swan Song_ is a return to the more serious side of my Gemini self. After the wacky world of _Another Gay Movie_ I wanted to go back to my roots and finish what I think of as my ‘Ohio Trilogy’ (started by _Edge of Seventeen_, then _Gypsy 83_). Honestly though, it took me years to find the courage to reveal the more personal/autobiographical side of myself again. But after many false starts and several amazing therapists, I finally got up the nerve to reopen my heart.  In many ways, the character of Pat is me, telling myself it’s not too late to do what I love.

_Was this film written with Udo Kier in mind?_

I should make Udo happy and say yes, but I actually had Gene Wilder in my head when I wrote the first draft. But after spending more than a year searching for the perfect Pat, it became clear that the only human being on this planet who could fully do him justice was Udo Kier. Watching Udo’s performance on set every day was like witnessing a master class in acting.

_What was Udo’s first reaction to the screenplay?_

Udo called me right away, and said he loved it. I jumped on the first plane to Palm Springs to meet him, and the rest is history. Udo was very gracious with helping to get the film off the ground – I later returned to Palm Springs to shoot a Kickstarter video in his fabulous living room. One of the biggest bonuses of making _Swan Song_ has been making a new best friend in Udo. He’s family now.

_Can you talk about your attraction to small-town America?_

Sandusky, Ohio is where I was born and raised, and will always be a huge part of who I am. I’ve had a love/hate relationship with my hometown over the years – it’s like I couldn’t wait to leave and now I can’t wait to return. Times have changed since we filmed _Edge of Seventeen_ there in 1997 and felt like we needed to keep the film’s gay storyline in the closet. In fact, when producer Eric Eisenbrey and I arrived back in town to start preproduction for _Swan Song_ Sandusky was celebrating its 3rd  Annual Gay Pride Festival. My queer inner child almost couldn’t process it! After years of being down and out, Sandusky’s reawakening helped inspire Pat’s rebirth in the film.

_If you could choose anyone living or dead, who would you choose to do your hair for your funeral?_

The late, great Mister Pat, of course! But, assuming he’s all booked up after the film comes out, my second choice would be the late Sydney Guilaroff, whose genius Hollywood creations inspired our final look for Linda Evans.  Who am I kidding, though? In reality – I told my husband Tim he has to personally style my hair in the casket because he’s the only one who really knows how I do it, _haha_.

_What’s your drag name and what song do you perform?_

Lazy Susan. And probably something by Stevie Nicks. But only if I feel like it.

**Production notes**
<br><br>

**SWAN SONG**  
_Directed by_: Todd Stephens  
©: Swan Song Film LLC  
_Production Company_: Luna Pictures  
_Presented by_: Luna Pictures  
_In association with_: House of Gemini  
_Executive Producers_: Rhet Topham, Meghan Hogrefe, Jay Fraley, Rick Hogrefe, Drew Sklar  
_Produced by_: Todd Stephens, Eric Eisenbrey,  Tim Kaltenecker, Rhet Topham, Stephen Israel  
_Line Producer_: Kenneth Altman  
_Unit Production Manager_: Kenneth Altman  
_Location Manager_: Nick Avery  
_1st Assistant Director_: Vernon Guinn  
_Script Supervisor_: Kimberlee Andrews  
_Casting by_: Eve Battaglia, Lina Todd  
_Written by_: Todd Stephens  
_Director of Photography_: Jackson Warner Lewis  
_Visual Effects_: Santiago Figueira W.  
_Edited by_: Spencer Schilly, Santiago Figueira W.  
_Production Designer_: Kassandra DeAngelis  
_Art Director_: Vince Calabrese  
_Set Decorator_: Teresa Strebler  
_Costume Designers_: Shawna-Nova Foley,  Kitty Boots  
_Key Hair/Make-up_: Lydia Kane  
_Main Title Design_: Santiago Figueira W.  
_Original Score_: Chris Stephens  
_All Instruments Played by_: Chris Stephens  
_Music Supervisor_: Gerry Gershman  
_Sound Designer_: Arjun. G. Sheth  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Matthew Gelzer  
_Sound Mixer_: Arjun. G. Sheth

**Cast**  
Udo Kier _(Mister Pat Pitsenbarger)_  
Jennifer Coolidge _(Dee Dee Dale)_  
Ira Hawkins _(Eunice)_  
Stephanie McVay _(Sue)_  
Thom Hilton _(Gabriel)_  
Justin Lonesome _(Miss Velma)_  
Tom Bloom _(Walter Shanrock)_  
Shanessa Sweeney _(Ro Ro)_  
Jonah Blechman _(Tristan)_  
Annie Kitral _(Miss Gertie)_  
Bryant Carroll _(Lyle)_  
Shelby Garrett _(Evie)_  
Catherine Albers _(Janie)_  
Eric Eisenbrey _(David)_  
Roshon Thomas _(Shaundell)_  
Dave Sorboro _(Josiah)_  
Ray Perrin _(Scottie)_  
Tim Murray _(nurse)_  
Michael Urie _(Dustin)_  
Linda Evans _(Rita Parker Sloan)_

USA 2021©  
105 mins

A Peccadillo Pictures release<br>
<br>

**NEW & RE-RELEASES**<br>
**Get Carter**<br>
Continues from Fri 27 May<br>
**Benediction**<br>
From Fri 3 Jun<br>
**Pickpocket**<br>
From Fri 3 Jun<br>
**All My Friends Hate Me**<br>
From Fri 10 Jun<br>
**Bergman Island**<br>
From Fri 10 Jun<br>
**Swan Song**<br>
From Fri 10 Jun<br>
**Wings of Desire (Der Himmel über Berlin)**<br>
From Fri 24 Jun (Q&A with Wim Wenders on Sat 25 Jun 15:00)<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwODM3NTg5NjldfQ==
-->
