---
layout: post
title: Rent
published: true
date: 2022-02-05
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Musical, Drama]
metadata: 'USA 2005, 135 mins<br> Director: Chris Columbus'
pdf: '2022-02-05-rent.pdf'
---

After seeing _Rent_ soon after it opened on Broadway, director Chris Columbus (_Home Alone, Mrs. Doubtfire, Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone)_ was so inspired, he immediately corralled his 1492 Pictures partners Michael Barnathan and Mark Radcliffe into seeing the musical as well. They reacted with similar enthusiasm.

It wasn’t only Jonathan Larson’s wonderful music and lyrics that captured their attention, but the powerful and honest way in which it dealt with crucial contemporary life issues. Says Radcliffe: ‘The show tackled two significant life questions we all share: First, “What am I going to do with my life” and secondly, “Who am I going to spend it with?”’

In addition, Radcliffe continues, ‘You add the complication of having a limited time to live. How will you deal with that as well?’

The moment Columbus, Radcliffe and Barnathan left the theatre, all they could talk about was ‘how great it would be to do a movie with the kind of energy, power and emotional immediacy of the show we had just seen on stage,’ recalls producer Barnathan.

‘To me _Rent_ was about dealing with emotion, about confronting the feeling of falling in love for the first time,’ says Columbus, ‘and regardless of some of its darker aspects, it was ultimately about hope, about understanding that each day is important and you need to live each day to its fullest.’

Bringing _Rent_ to the screen became the filmmakers’ passion and, for several years, they tried to obtain the rights to the project, which had been optioned by Jane Rosenthal and Robert De Niro, who run Tribeca Productions. Finally,  in 2004, they were able to partner with Tribeca and secure financing for  the project.

‘I was on the phone with Chris giving him the news that our funding had fallen through,’ says Barnathan. ‘(Revolution Studios’ founder) Joe Roth overheard my conversation, turned around and said, “If you’re talking about _Rent_, I’ll finance the movie.” We had a deal within a week.’

When Rosenthal learned that Revolution Studios had agreed to provide the funding for _Rent,_ she was overjoyed. ‘Bob (De Niro) and I had spent almost a decade trying to bring this project to the screen,’ says Rosenthal. ‘We were thrilled to hear that Chris and 1492 were able to secure the financing and finally make this labour of love a reality.’

Though, according to Columbus, it may not be apparent from his previous films, he has a close affinity to the story of _Rent._ ‘I lived in New York for 17 years in the 1980s when _Rent_ takes place. I lived in a loft and had a lot of those experiences. We were dirt poor and we lived in a loft on 26th Street in Manhattan for three years,’ he says. ‘I could relate to exactly what the characters of Mark (Anthony Rapp) and Roger (Adam Pascal) were going through. I knew those people. So for me, it was an opportunity to go back to a very important time in my life and to bring my own experiences to that part of it. I was concerned about someone else doing it who didn’t have that experience and hadn’t lived in that world. For me it was extremely important not to homogenise any of the elements of the play. I wanted the film to be, in a sense, even grittier because film enables you to be a lot more realistic.’

Having secured Revolution Studios and Tribeca as partners, Columbus next met with members of Jonathan Larson’s family, his sister Julie and father Al Larson. There was an immediate connection, and after several years of false starts and stops, the Larson’s felt comfortable and excited to entrust _Rent_ to Columbus.

‘For seven or eight years, we felt a huge burden of having (a) decided to allow a movie to be made and (b) what was that going to be?’ recalls co-producer Julie Larson. ‘We really didn’t know. We just knew it was taking a chance on something that was going to be different. We were terrified that we would let the fans down or let my brother down, so there was a huge burden.’

‘I think it sort of took the time that it needed – all these false starts – so that it could get to Chris,’ continues Larson, ‘I was still very nervous about the idea of making a movie. But once we met Chris, we felt so comfortable – he got it.’

The bond continued throughout the film’s production with Larson’s father, Al, a constant and comforting presence. ‘Having Al on the set every day was a remarkable thing. He was like my own personal connection to Jonathan Larson,’ says Columbus. ‘I never knew Jonathan. I’d read about him, seen documentary footage and talked to some of his friends, but having Al there was an emotional connection for me, another level of inspiration. He was the unofficial set papa. He was always there for any of us.’

The majority of the film’s exteriors were shot in New York. Production designer Howard Cummings began his work by taking pictures of entire Manhattan neighbourhoods to find just the right look for each scene. ‘I went to the places that I knew hadn’t changed much over the years,’ he recalls.

Shooting on actual city streets was an entirely new and different experience for the show’s returning cast members. ‘The most surreal experience for me in terms of taking it from stage to film,’ says Anthony Rapp, ‘was when I got to sing a big section of “What You Own” while actually walking down Seventh Street in the East Village. There I was between Avenues A and B, at night, in the cold, with Tompkins Square Park on my left and this row of houses on my right. I was walking down the middle of the street singing with the music blaring in my ears and I thought, “This is amazing.”’

Additional external locations in New York included other areas of the East Village, East Side Community High School, the Flatiron District in midtown Manhattan, the Williamsburg Bridge and a subway station in Brooklyn.

Cummings required locations and sets that worked on several levels. ‘The reason _Rent_ works so well is because it goes from being really intimate to being large and exuberant and kind of wild and crazy.’<br>
**Production notes**<br>

**RENT**<br>
_Directed by_: Chris Columbus  
_©_: Revolution Studios Distribution Company LLC  
_Production Company_: Tribeca Productions  
_Presented by_: Revolution Studios, Columbia Pictures Corporation  
_In association with_: 1492 Productions  
_Executive Producers_: Jeffrey Seller, Kevin McCollum, Allan S. Gordon, Lata Ryan  
_Co-executive Producer_: Tom Sherak  
_Produced by_: Jane Rosenthal, Robert De Niro, Chris Columbus, Mark Radcliffe, Michael Barnathan  
_Co-producer_: Julie Larson  
_Associate Producers_: Paula Dupré Pesmen, Geoff Hansen  
_Unit Production Manager_: Pamela Thur-Weir  
_Production Manager_: L. Dean Jones Jr  
_Production Accountant_: Stevie Jean Lazo  
_Location Manager_: Jonathan Shedd  
_Location Manager (NY Unit)_: Patty Carey-Perazzo  
_Location Manager (LA Unit)_: Gerard Averill  
_1st Assistant Director_: Geoff Hansen  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Sunday Stevens  
_Script Supervisor_: Carol DePasquale  
_Script Supervisor (NY Unit)_: Thomas Johnston  
_Casting by_: Bernard Telsey  
_Screenplay by_: Stephen Chbosky  
_Based on the musical by_: Jonathan Larson  
_Book, Music and Lyrics by_: Jonathan Larson  
_Director of Photography_: Stephen Goldblatt  
_Camera Operator_: Ray De La Motte  
_B Camera/Steadicam Operator_: William Arnot  
_16mm Cameraman_: Michael Anderson  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: Scott Farrar  
_Visual Effects Producer_: Stephanie Hornish  
_Special Visual Effects_: Industrial Light & Magic  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: John McLeod  
_Edited by_: Richard Pearson  
_Additional Editor_: Sean Thompson  
_Production Designer_: Howard Cummings  
_Art Director_: Nanci Noblett Starr  
_Set Designers_: Jann Engel, Harry E. Otto, Craig Edelblut, Caroline Quinn Decker, Paul Measom  
_Set Decorator_: Barbara Munch  
_Costume Designer_: Aggie Guerard Rodgers  
_Costume Supervisors_: Elaine Ramires, Judy Feil  
_Department Head Make-up_: Mindy Hall  
_Key Make-up_: Debra Coleman  
_Department Head Hair_: Yvette Rivas  
_Key Hair_: Chris Clark  
_Main Titles Designed by_: Shine  
_Score Written by_: Jamie Muhoberac, Tim Pierce, Rob Cavallo, Doug McKean  
_RENT Band_: Paul Bushnell _(bass);_ Dorian Crozier _(drums/percussions/programming)_; Jamie Muhoberac _(keyboards/piano/organ);_ Tim Pierce, Greg Suran _(electric/acoustic guitars)_  
_Vocal Conductor_: Tim Weil  
_Strings/Horns Conducted/Arranged by_: David Richard Campbell  
_Songs/Music Arranged by_: Rob Cavallo  
_Music Supervisor_: Matt Sullivan  
_Choreography_: Keith Young  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Nelson Stoll  
_Supervising Sound Mixers_: Michael Minkler, Lora Hirschberg  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Richard Hymns  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Rocky Capella<br>

**Cast**  
Rosario Dawson _(Mimi Marquez)_  
Taye Diggs _(Benjamin Coffin III)_  
Wilson Jermaine Heredia _(Angel Dumott Schunard)_  
Jesse L. Martin _(Tom Collins)_  
Idina Menzel _(Maureen Johnson)_  
Adam Pascal _(Roger Davis)_  
Anthony Rapp _(Mark Cohen)_  
Tracie Thoms _(Joanne Jefferson)_  
Aaron Lohr _(Steve)_  
Sarah Silverman _(Alexi Darling)_  
Wayne Wilcox _(Gordon)_  
Anna Deavere Smith _(Mrs Jefferson)_  
Daryl Edwards _(Mr Jefferson)_  
Daniel London _(Paul)_  
Aisha de Haas _(blanket woman)_<br>
Julia Roth, Porscha Radcliffe _(rent tenants)_  
Stephen Payne _(homeless Squeegee man)_  
Darryl Chan, Ken Clark, R.C. Ormond _(thugs)_  
David Fine _(homeless man on Range Rover)_  
MacKenzie Firgens _(April)_  
Eleanor Columbus _(April’s friend)_  
Matthew McCollum _(guy at bar)_  
Jason Foster _(the man)_  
Brendan Columbus, Austin Shea _(punks in park)_  
Bianca Sams _(Ali)_  
Heather Barberie _(Pam)_  
Liisa Cohen _(Sue)_  
Sharon Ferrol-Young, Liz Ramos, Kristin Medwick, Katie Weber, Angela McConnell, Jamielyn Duggin, Feleciana Stevenson, Kim Williams<br> _(Cat Scratch floor dancers)_  
Damia Foti, Laura Padierne _(Cat Scratch waitress)_  
Kevin Hagan, Brian Delate _(cops)_  
Michael Rosales, Niyuk Hairell, Larissa Kiernan _(subway punks)_  
Marco de la Cruz, Ericka Harden, Truc Luong _(subway passengers)_  
Megan Biolchini _(subway grad student)_  
Nick Scoggin _(subway man)_  
John Champion, Titus West _(subway stockbrokers)_  
Renda Pettis _(slightly older subway woman)_  
Alison De Oliveira _(subway businesswoman)_  
Debbie de Coudreaux _(subway mom)_  
Chris Chalk _(street vendor who sells coats)_  
Cory Duval, Clarke Devereux _(riot cops)_  
Coren Rosey _(Life Cafe manager)_  
Shaun Earl _(Life Cafe waiter)_  
Matthew Dickens, Tara Nicole Hughes, Troy Christian, Gigi Hunter, Kevin Stea, Robert Prescott Lee, Sebastien Poffet, Linda Cevallos, Roosevelt Flenoury _(bohemians)_  
Mike Garibaldi _(Mr Grey)_  
Rod Arrants _(Mr Hansen)_  
Jennifer Siebel _(receptionist)_  
Kevin Blackton _(Mr Johnson)_  
Bettina Devin _(Mrs Johnson)_  
Corinne Blum _(female bartender at engagement party)_  
Annie Barnathan _(candy striper)_  
David Stewart, Marcos Estebez, Emily Rahe _(mourners)_  
Vivis Colombetti _(Angel’s grandmother)_  
Nicole Cherie Flores _(Angel’s sister)_  
James Anthony Cotton _(used car salesman)_  
Jim Cranna _(pawn shop dealer)_  
Randy Graff _(Mrs Cohen)_  
Joel Swetow _(Mr Cohen)_<br>

USA 2005©<br>
135 mins<br>
<br>

**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar**<br>
Tue 1 Feb 18:20; Fri 25 Feb 20:45<br>
**Young Soul Rebels**<br>
Wed 2 Feb 18:20 (+ intro by BFI Race Equality Lead Rico Johnson-Sinclair); Thu 17 Feb 20:45<br>
**All About My Mother (Todo sobre mi madre)**<br>
Wed 2 Feb 20:45; Wed 16 Feb 21:00<br>
**Beautiful Thing**<br>
Thu 3 Feb 20:45; Mon 14 Feb 20:30<br>
**The Handmaiden (Ah-ga-ssi)**<br>
Fri 4 Feb 17:50; Sat 12 Feb 20:10; Sun 27 Feb 17:50<br>
**Rent**<br>
Sat 5 Feb 12:30; Sun 20 Feb 18:10<br>
**Maurice**<br>
Sun 6 Feb 15:20; Mon 14 Feb 18:00<br>
**The Watermelon Woman**<br>
Mon 7 Feb 20:45; Sat 26 Feb 20:30<br>
**Happy Together (Chun gwong cha sit)**<br>
Tue 8 Feb 18:15 (+ intro by Yi Wang, Queer East); Sun 13 Feb 15:20<br>
**My Own Private Idaho**<br>
Tue 8 Feb 20:45; Wed 23 Feb 18:00 (+ intro by BFI Race Equality Lead Rico Johnson-Sinclair)<br>
**Brokeback Mountain**<br>
Wed 9 Feb 17:45 (+ intro by BFI Race Equality Lead Rico Johnson-Sinclair); Mon 21 Feb 20:25<br>
**Go Fish**<br>
Wed 9 Feb 20:40; Sat 26 Feb 18:20<br>
**Rope**<br>
Thu 10 Feb 18:30; Tue 22 Feb 14:30<br>
**Victim**<br>
Thu 10 Feb 20:40; Sun 13 Feb 13:00; Mon 21 Feb 18:00<br>
**Desert Hearts**<br>
Fri 11 Feb 20:40; Wed 16 Feb 18:20 (+ intro by BFI Head Librarian Emma Smart)<br>
**My Beautiful Laundrette**<br>
Sat 12 Feb 18:20; Tue 15 Feb 20:45; Sat 19 Feb 20:45<br>
**A Fantastic Woman (Una mujer fantástica)**<br>
Sun 13 Feb 18:40; Tue 22 Feb 20:50<br>
**Mädchen in Uniform**<br>
Fri 18 Feb 20:30; Sat 26 Feb 16:00<br>
**Moonlight**<br>
Thu 24 Feb 14:30; Mon 28 Feb 20:45<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

