---
layout: post
title: Thirteen
published: true
date: 2022-02-02
readtime: true
categories: ['SEEN & HEARD']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USA, 2003, 100 mins<br> Director: Catherine Hardwicke'
pdf: '2022-02-02-thirteen.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

_Thirteen_ was made in 26 days on a small budget by set designer and first-time director Catherine Hardwicke. Filmed in and around LA, it portrays the emotional chaos raging within teenager Tracy (Evan Rachel Wood). Like Larry Clark (_Kids_, _Bully_), Hardwicke gained the trust of the young people she filmed, constructed her script from their everyday talk and adopted a naturalistic shooting style. But unlike other films that trade on the raw edginess of youth culture and claim special insights into contemporary teenage malaise, _Thirteen_ provides a much stronger, more compassionate identification both with Tracy and with her mother Mel (Holly Hunter), who recognises that the trials of growing up are pushing her daughter into a familiar but terrifying madness.

Two simple devices enable _Thirteen_ to move beyond the usual explorations of adolescent identity crises. The filmmaking style is frenetic, with rapid editing and shaky handheld camerawork creating an effect of fragmentation and compression. The soundtrack too jolts and jars to echo Tracy’s emotional landscape, with fragments of speech interrupted by loud noises, shrieks of childish exuberance juxtaposed with expletives and dark mutterings. These elements produce a narrative which only just hangs together, but which vividly evokes the margin between recklessness and sublime hope that is the terrain of a 13-year-old girl growing up in America today. Hardwicke uses the same breathless camerawork to record the bewilderment, fear and panic of Mel, and the film acts as a formal reflection of the disintegration of the mother-daughter relationship under the influence of a dangerous interloper Tracy’s new best-friend Evie. Without a hint of heavy-handed psychoanalysis, _Thirteen_ plays out the mutual pain of mother-daughter separation.

The second dynamic that shapes the film is the nature of the script, a collaboration between the director and Nikki Reed (who plays the part of Evie) based on the latter’s account of her daily life aged 13. Hardwicke was Reed’s father’s girlfriend at the time, and as Nikki (like Tracy in the film) lost track of her other interests, Hardwicke was able to encourage her to enter into a co-writing project that didn’t feel intrusive, judgmental or exploitative. The narrative brings out their shared shock and fascination at the teenager’s precarious state of ‘becoming’ and mutual uncertainty about the origins of much of her rage.

The story covers a few months during which Tracy falls under the spell of the more sophisticated and glamorous Evie, known as the ‘hottest chick’ in school. Tracy’s desire to become Evie’s friend pushes her to transform herself, dispensing with the trappings of childhood to create a body image based on low-rider jeans, midriff-skimming tops and lots of jewellery and make-up. But saying goodbye to childhood also requires distancing herself from the comfort of her relationships with her elder brother, her less grown-up friends and her mother.

Evie swaggers around high school, pulls as many boys as she wants, experiments with drugs and enjoys the excitement of shop-lifting from boutiques crammed with thongs, makeup and bright baubles. Tracy wins her approval by exploiting a theft opportunity and from then on gains access to a dangerous universe. Her schoolwork deteriorates and Mel moves from alarm to panic as her daughter’s often drug-fuelled anger leads her to lash out at those who love her most, subjecting everyone around her to torrents of verbal abuse before locking herself in the family bathroom. She calls Mel’s ex-coke-addict boyfriend a loser and steals a purse from one of her home-hairdressing clients.

One drug experience leads to another, the dangers far outweighing those of the sexual rituals of learning how to make out with boys. Evie, who has been partly abandoned by her parents and guardian, moves into Tracy’s home, while Tracy’s inexplicable anger pushes her to ever more aggressive forms of self-mutilation. Eventually the girls separate, and a degree of calm and exhaustion prevail.

_Thirteen_ depicts a world where the fashioning of a credible female self brings with it incalculable injuries and loss and the coercion involved in the requirement to become a ‘real girl’ gives rise to an unfathomable rage. While the girls flaunt their sexual confidence with boys in the outside world, back home they become children again, jumping up and down on the bed, shrieking on finding the family dog asleep in their room. The film probes the pain and anguish involved in departing from this childhood and explores what makes Tracy so angry with life and with herself.

Indeed, Tracy’s most intense feelings are by no means for the usual heterosexual object of desire. There’s a good deal of girl/boy ‘snagging’ in the film and at one point the two friends set themselves up as teenage temptresses in the style of porn queens with a hilariously silly dance routine and an attempt to snare an older neighbour into something more dangerous. But all the passion here is between Tracy and Evie, who inhabit an undemarcated zone of intimacy, attraction, proximity and exclusiveness.

Such early-teenage female friendships – frightening because they are so passionate – unfold in a realm of still polymorphous perversity where heterosexuality is by no means established but beckons as what is assumed. What is the nature of these girls’ love for each other – is it about being as close as possible, becoming mirror images of one another? Tracy’s desire is apparent early on as she catches sight of the enviable in-crowd girls as they parade catwalk-style through the schoolyard. Once she’s managed to give herself the right kind of look she lands a date with Evie and is triumphant. After Tracy proves her mettle by stealing from a woman’s purse, the pair become inseparable, even sharing a mother when Evie moves in (she shows an unconscious understanding of the psychoanalytic dynamics at work by fulsomely kissing Mel in appreciation of her generosity and liberality). Amid such ambivalence, uncertainty and danger, desire and enjoyment are heightened.

Young girls in the affluent, postfeminist west have been subject to new kinds of freedom, no longer restricted by the knowledge that soon their horizons will be limited to fulfilling designated roles as wives and mothers. Here there are no differences in the expectations of boys and girls (both Tracy and her brother experiment with drugs and look for sexual opportunities) and it is Tracy who pushes down the barriers and her brother who eventually confronts her and tells her she needs help.

But the world these young girls move in is also full of difficulties, and to go hurtling through it in a drug-induced purple haze is indicative of the need for a chemical to dull the pain. _Thirteen_ shows its intelligence in refusing to find a simple external scapegoat for the girls’ plight. It carefully avoids simplistic suggestions about consumer culture fuelling their anxieties, nor are they preyed on by drug dealers. There’s no hint that they are paying the price of a previous generation’s feminist successes nor that they will learn their lessons and return meekly to the safety zone.

Yet despite the lack of easy resolutions, an understated hopefulness emerges. Mel’s ex-coke-addict boyfriend, whom Tracy scorns, is decent and respectful of her suffering. In an America where teen films still skirt round mixed-race relationships, mixed-race intimacy is here an unremarkable norm. In a low-income household, a mother can not only make ends meet and care for her children but can also look attractive and maintain a warm circle of friends. (So much for the dysfunctional, poor-looking ‘single mom’. So much for the end of community.) The film also holds out for sustaining an intergenerational bond between women. Whenever motherhood veers towards overprotectiveness at just that point where daughters need to safeguard their own intimacies, a drama of repudiation sets in. _Thirteen_’s careful observations help us to understand what it means to become a woman for a new generation.<br>
**Angela McRobbie, _Sight and Sound_, December 2003**<br>

**THIRTEEN**<br>
_Director_: Catherine Hardwicke  
_©_: Venice Surf Club LLC  
_Presented by_: Universal Pictures, Le Studio Canal+  
_Presented in association with_: Michael London Productions, Working Title Films  
_Production Company_: Antidote Films  
_Executive Producers_: Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Liza Chasin, Holly Hunter  
_Produced by_: Jeffrey Levy-Hinte, Michael London  
_Co-producer_: Rosemary Marks  
_Associate Producers_: Canada Gordon, Christina Sibul  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Greg Dunigan  
_Location Manager_: Peter James  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Beau J. Genot  
_Production Consultant_: Scott Ferguson  
_Staff of Antidote Films_: Mary Jane Skalski, Takeo Hori, Susan Leber  
_1st Assistant Director_: John P. O’Rourke  
_2nd Assistant Director_: John T. Melick  
_2nd 2nd Assistant Director_: Jason R. Dudek  
_Script Supervisor_: Tracey J. Merkle  
_Casting_: Jakki Fink, Shani Ginsberg  
_Extras Casting_: Deedee Ricketts  
_Casting Assistant_: Inessa Freylekhman  
_Written by_: Catherine Hardwicke, Nikki Reed  
_Director of Photography_: Elliot Davis  
_Camera Operator_: Kara Stephens  
_B Camera Operator_: Kara Stephens  
_Editor_: Nancy Richardson  
_Associate Editor_: Hilary Schroeder  
_Assistant Film Editor_: Alessandra Carlino  
_Production Designer_: Carol Strober  
_Art Director_: Johnny Jos  
_‘Chicken Trick’ Inventor_: Alden Wallace  
_Set Decorator_: Dorit Oberman  
_Artwork_: Irene Hardwicke Olivieri, Richard Edson  
_Costume Designer_: Cindy Evans  
_Assistant Costume Designer_: Anne Laoparadonchai  
_Make-up_: Judy Lovell  
_Hair_: Elaine M. Cascio  
_Main Titles Designed by_: Susan Burig  
_End Titles_: F-Stop, Scarlet Letters  
_Digital Colour_: Technique  
_Tech (Executive Producers)_: Evan Edelist, Peter Sternlicht  
_Digital Intermediate_: Technique  
_Music Composed by_: Mark Mothersbaugh  
_Additional Music_: Lavant Coppock  
_Musicians_: Mark Mothersbaugh, Lavant Coppock, Michael Miller, Gordon Peeke, DJ Swamp  
_Music Supervisors_: Amy Rosen, Michelle Norrell  
_Music Produced by_: Mark Mothersbaugh<br>
_Music Editor_: Richard Henderson  
_Music Engineered by_: Lavant Coppock  
_Musical Sound Design_: Ron Small  
_Sound Design/Supervision_: Frank Gaeta  
_Utility Sound_: Eric J. Naughton  
_Recordist_: J. Aloysius Flanagan III  
_Production Sound Mixers_: Steve Morantz, Steve Weiss  
_Technician_: Michael Cruz  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Lance Brown, Derek Marcil  
_Sound Editors_: Jed Dodge, Dennis Twitty  
_ADR Loop Group_: Lala Paloopers, Beth Wernick  
_ADR Recordist_: Rogers Masson  
_ADR Mixers_: Chris Philp, Mike Fox  
_Foley Artist_: Phyllis Ginter, Craig Ng  
_Foley Mixer_: Marilyn Graf Hubbard  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Chuck Borden  
_Tracy’s Poem was written by_: Eliza Mae Smith<br>

**Cast**  
Holly Hunter _(Melanie)_  
Evan Rachel Wood _(Tracy)_  
Nikki Reed _(Evie Zamora)_  
Jeremy Sisto _(Brady)_  
Brady Corbet _(Mason)_  
Deborah Kara Unger _(Brooke)_  
Kip Pardue _(Luke)_  
Sarah Clarke _(Birdie)_  
D.W. Moffett _(Travis)_  
Vanessa Anne Hudgens _(Noel)_  
Jenicka Carey _(Astrid)_  
Ulysses Estrada _(Rafa)_  
Sarah Blakely-Cartwright _(Medina)_  
Jasmine Salim _(Kayla)_  
Tessa Ludwick _(Yumi)_  
Cece Tsou _(businesswoman)_  
Jamison Yang _(science teacher)_  
Frank Merino _(tattoo artist)_  
Cynthia Ettinger _(Cynthia)_  
Charles Duckworth _(Javi)_  
Steven Kozlowski _(skanky guy)_  
Javá Benson _(rapper 1)_  
Motough _(rapper 2)_  
Brandy Rainey _(girl)_  
Yasmine Delawari _(English teacher)_  
Hampton _(himself)_<br>

USA 2003©<br>
100 min<br>
<br>

**SEEN & HEARD: DARING FEMALE COMING-OF-AGE FILMS**<br>
**Thirteen**<br>
Wed 2 Feb 20:40; Fri 11 Feb 18:10<br>
**House of Hummingbird (Beolsae)**<br>
Sat 5 Feb 20:20; Sat 26 Feb 17:40<br>
**It Felt Like Love**<br>
Sun 6 Feb 18:00; Wed 16 Feb 20:30<br>
**Fish Tank**<br>
Thu 10 Feb 20:30; Sat 19 Feb 20:40<br>
**Mustang**<br>
Fri 11 Feb 20:30; Sat 26 Feb 13:40<br>
**In Between Days**<br>
Sun 13 Feb 18:30; Sat 26 Feb 20:40<br>
**Rafiki**<br>
Mon 14 Feb 18:20; Fri 18 Feb 18:00; Wed 23 Feb 20:30<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

