---
layout: post
title: The Frog
published: true
date: 2022-08-16
readtime: true
categories: ['PROJECTING THE ARCHIVE']
tags: [Crime]
metadata: 'UK 1937, 75 mins<br> Director: Jack Raymond'
pdf: '2022-08-16-frog.pdf'
---

_Introduced by Vic Pratt, Producer, BFI Video Publishing_

Edgar Wallace’s 1925 novel _The Fellowship of the Frog_ centres on the investigation by two Scotland Yard policemen, Captain Richard Gordon and Sergeant Elk, into the nefarious organisation of the title, run by one of those mysterious masterminds of the criminal kind found only in fiction, known simply as ‘The Frog’. Achieving instant popularity on the page (as did all of Wallace’s works), the cinemagoing public did not have to wait long before the story made its transferral to the big screen, appearing in serial form in 1928 with its adaptation in ten episodes as _The Mark of the Frog_, a production of the American company Pathé Exchange, that most prolific producer of serials in the silent period (more on serials later). Jack Edmund Nolan cited another film version, now simply called _The Frog_, as having been produced in 1931, although Nolan failed to cite any relevant details that may have been of assistance in identifying the film, namely production country or actors.  This film, if indeed there ever was one, remains a mystery, appearing in no other sources.

That latter anomaly apart, the next screen adaptation of the Wallace story was the 1937 British film being screened today, which was based, not directly on the novel itself, but on the 1935 stage adaptation by Ian Hay. Running for two years at the Princes Theatre in London, the stage version had starred, in the respective roles of police officers Gordon and Elk, the two actors who were to repeat their roles in the film version, shot while the play was still running: a young Jack Hawkins, and, one of Wallace’s own favourite actors and the star of many stage and film adaptations of the author’s works, Gordon Harker.

It was indeed in an Edgar Wallace play that Harker found his first major role, that of Sam Hackett in _The Ringer_. Cast by Wallace himself, the result was, at least according to _Picturegoer Weekly_ a number of years later, a ‘sensational success’, which led to Harker’s ‘subsequent development as the unrivalled exponent of Cockney characters’. Further Wallace plays were to follow in its wake for Harker in the 1920s and 1930s, including _The Case of the Frightened Lady_, _The Calendar_ and _Number Six_. Such was the actor’s links with the name of Wallace on the stage that he was a natural to follow a similar path on the screen. In all, Harker was to appear in eight Wallace film adaptations produced between 1930 and 1938, beginning with _The Squeaker_ in 1930 (directed by Wallace himself), and including the reprisal of his stage roles in the screen versions of _The Ringer_ (1931), _The Frightened Lady_ (1932), and, of course, that of Sergeant Elk in _The Frog_.

It was Gordon Harker’s participation in _The Frog_ that was seen by many at the time as the highlight of the film. While the _Monthly Film Bulletin_ believed  _The Frog_ to be ‘too obvious a thriller to be really thrilling’, there was at least some compensation in that ‘Gordon Harker makes a vigilant and amusing Elk, [although] most of the other characters lack vitality.’ Harker was also the primary reason for seeing the film in the opinion of other like-minded reviewers. ‘No one outstanding in the cast beyond Gordon Harker’ was the verdict of _Variety_, while for Basil Wright in the _Spectator_, ‘what life it possesses is due to the splendour of Gordon Harker … Armed with drab mackintosh, with bowler hat, with umbrella pregnant with malice, he stumps from reel to reel, turning all dross to gold.’

Although, as evidenced from some of the above quotes, a number of reviewers gave _The Frog_ a lukewarm reception (‘a humdrum thriller, which establishes the drearier levels of competence only too typical of many British films’ continued Basil Wright in the _Spectator_), others actually viewed the film in a glowing light, even comparing it favourably, in contrast to Wright, with American films of the same ilk. _Kinematograph Weekly_ summed up the film as, ‘a gangster comedy-melodrama made in England with refreshingly English characters, dialogue, humour and locale. This film is more than equal in entertainment values to the best of its popular transatlantic rivals.’ _Film Weekly_ was equally enthusiastic along the same patriotic lines: ‘It is pleasing to find, from our own studios, a comparatively unpretentious picture which compares favourably with some of the best American efforts of the kind.’

As far as the two trade journals _Kinematograph Weekly_ and _Today’s Cinema_ were concerned, any Edgar Wallace adaptation could not go wrong for the exhibitor. They respectively declared that ‘the story, motivated by a generous measure of the unexpected, is real Edgar Wallace, and is packed with excitement,’ and ‘Edgar Wallace is a name to conjure with in the realm of fictional crime and detection. It [_The Frog_] will provide the popular showman with a useful “pull” in exploiting this picture.’ The trade journals, in contrast to some of the other reviewers, were obviously on the same wavelength as audiences, for the film’s success led to the production of a sequel the following year, _The Return of the Frog_, with Harker again starring, but this time as the newly promoted Inspector Elk.

The story of _The Fellowship of the Frog_ managed to retain its popularity for a number of years to come. Adapted by the BBC for their _Sunday Night Theatre_ slot in 1958, Wilfred Pickles and Donald Sinden appeared as Elk and Gordon, with a pre-stardom Michael Caine way down the cast list as ‘third police constable’.  
**John Oliver, BFI National Archive**
<br><br>

**THE FROG**  
_Director:_ Jack Raymond  
_Production Company:_ Herbert Wilcox Productions  
_Producer:_ Herbert Wilcox *  
_Production Manager:_ Tom White  
_Assistant Director:_ John Harlow  
_Scenario:_ Gerald Elliott  
_Dialogue:_ Ian Hay  
_Based on the novel by:_ Edgar Wallace  
_Based on the play adaptation by:_ Ian Hay  
_Director of Photography:_ F.A. Young  
_Editor:_ Frederick Wilson  
_Editor:_ Merrill G. White *  
_Art Director:_ David Rawnsley  
_Music Director:_ Geraldo  
_Sound Recording:_ L.E. Overton, J. Dennis  

**Cast**  
Gordon Harker _(Sergeant Elk)_  
Carol Goodner _(Lola Bassano)_  
Noah Beery _(Joshua Broad)_  
Jack Hawkins _(Captain Gordon)_  
Richard Ainley _(Ray Bennett)_  
Cyril Smith _(Police Constable Balder)_  
Felix Aylmer _(John Bennett)_  
Harold Franklyn _(Hagen)_  
Vivian Gaye _(Stella Bennett)_  
Julien Mitchell _(John Maitland)_  
Esme Percy _(Philo Johnson)_  
Alfred Atkins  
Gordon McLeod _(commissioner)_ *  

UK 1937  
75 mins

*Uncredited

A BFI National Archive print<br>
<br>

**NEW RELEASES**<br>
**Hit the Road (Jaddeh Khaki)**<br>
Continues from Fri 29 Jul<br>
**The Feast**<br>
From Fri 19 Aug<br>
**Where Is Anne Frank**<br>
From Fri 19 Aug<br>
**Queen of Glory**<br>
From Fri 28 Aug<br>

**RE-RELEASES**<br>
**The Big City (Mahanagar)**<br>
Continues from Fri 22 Jul<br>
**Paris, Texas**<br>
Continues from Fri 29 Jul<br>
**The Harder They Come**<br>
From Fri 5 Aug (+ intro by season curator and author Lloyd Bradley on Fri 5 Aug 18:15)<br>
**Burning an Illusion**<br>
From Fri 19 Aug<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE3MTY2MTI2NDVdfQ==
-->
