---
layout: post
title: Mandabi
published: true
date: 2022-07-15
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'Senegal/France 1968, 93 mins<br> Director: Ousmane Sembène'
pdf: '2022-07-15-mandabi.pdf'
---

Money – its prospect or absence – is the root of all misfortune in Sembene’s debut feature, a darkly satirical fable in which a man, complacently lording it over his two wives, is sent a money order by a nephew in Paris, only to fall foul of bureaucracy, parasitical neighbours, corruption and his own pride. A caustic portrait of shifting power-bases in a post-colonial Senegal.  
**bfi.org.uk**  

Hearing of the difficulties faced by the BFI and the Cineteca di Bologna as they attempted to digitise the work of the great filmmaker Ousmane Sembène, Martin Scorsese was prompted to action. ‘It was like the movie was a prisoner,’ says Alain Sembène, the director’s son, recalling how the 35mm negatives of _Black Girl_ (_La Noire de…_, 1966), his father’s seminal 55-minute debut, were being stored by the film laboratory Eclair in France. ‘It was stuck in bureaucracy because there were documents my father had not signed. We almost gave up. Then Martin Scorsese wrote a letter saying it was a scandal, and boom, it happened.’

I was speaking to Alain Sembène following the premiere of the restoration of his father’s second film _Mandabi_ at the Lumière Festival in Lyon in 2019. _Mandabi_ – the first feature made in the Wolof language – has been remastered in 4K with StudioCanal’s partners at the French post-production company VDM, scanned from the original 35mm interpositive. The sound too has been remastered from badly damaged archive footage. At last, the film can be fully appreciated as a crucial work by a master director.

That it took Scorsese’s efforts to kickstart the remastering of the director’s work is an indication of the widespread failure to appreciate Sembène. This may seem an odd statement, given how often he is described as ‘the father of African cinema’. Yet underlying this praise is a suggestion that Sembène’s legitimacy rests on where he made films: it’s time that discussion of Sembène’s work focused on what it is about.

His magnificent 1968 film _Mandabi_ is about the problems that the ageing, unemployed Ibrahima (Makhouredia Gueye) faces when he receives a money order from his nephew in Paris. _Black Girl_ – about the struggles of a young Senegalese woman working as a servant in Paris – was Sembène’s first feature, but _Mandabi_ is the film that marks out the themes of his career: his anti-capitalist, anti-religious concerns, and his clear-sighted probing of issues of class.

The film may attack colonialism but, importantly, it also attacks those citizens who, once the European powers left the continent, did everything in their power to maintain the status quo. In Senegal, this meant retaining French as the official language, even though most Senegalese only spoke Wolof or Arabic, and taking on elements of bureaucracy to ensure that it was nigh on impossible to climb the social ladder.

For all its weighty implications, the beauty of _Mandabi_ is that it looks and feels so simple. The plot follows Ibrahima, an unemployed father of seven, as he tries to cash the money order. He has two wives who dote on him and turn a blind eye to his failings; although life is difficult, he is content. That changes when his nephew sends him a money order for 25,000 CFA francs (about $50). The parable then slowly reveals itself – the arrival of capital from France will ruin his life.

To start with, Ibrahima cannot understand the letter, written as it is in French. Then the post office refuses to accept the money order because he doesn’t have an identity card – which he cannot get because he doesn’t have a birth certificate. Meanwhile, word gets out about the windfall, and friends, neighbours and religious figures come to him asking for donations and loans, while more educated men set out to swindle Ibrahima. Sembène reinforces his critique of capitalism by appearing in the film himself, sitting at a table beneath a Che Guevara poster.

Born to a family of fishermen in the southern Senegalese region of Casamance in 1923, Sembène moved to France after World War II, where he worked as a docker, becoming active in the unions and embracing Marxist philosophy, before a back injury forced him to rest. He used his time to write poetry and prose; his third novel, _God’s Bits of Wood_ (1960), about the difficulties of being an immigrant in France, was a huge hit. Sembène adapted _Mandabi_ from his novella _Le Mandat_, which was first published in France in 1966, around the time that _Black Girl_ screened at the Cannes Film Festival.

At the First World Festival of Negro Arts, held in Dakar in April 1966, Sembène won a literature prize for _Le Mandat_ and a film prize for _Black Girl_. André Malraux, author and French minister of culture, was a guest of honour, and offered to arrange for France’s Centre national de la cinématographie to fund his next work. Ironically, given the film’s themes, Sembène took the money and used it, in _Mandabi_, to reveal Europe’s attempts to manage Africa for its own ends – to show that colonialism persists even when the guns have left, in the history told, and in the cultural and economic heritage that the colonial powers left behind.

One of the reasons that _Mandabi_ was the first feature-length film in Wolof was that colonial administrations had banned natives from filmmaking – simply making the film was a political act. Sembène would argue that cinema enabled him to speak to the illiterate citizens that his novels were about.

All the big targets in _Mandabi_ would remain central to Sembène’s work throughout his career. The criticism of religion would feature right up to his ninth and final film, _Moolaadé_ (2004), which addresses female genital mutilation. _Ceddo_ (1977) was heavily censored in Senegal, according to rumour because of its religious content.

Sembène composed the score for _Mandabi_ himself, with the music choices reflecting the traditions of African music, rather than the fusions popular in America and Cuba at the time. Every choice in the film is packed with such double meaning. _Mandabi_ poses the question: why are Africans treated as second-class citizens, not just abroad but at home, in their own countries? Its clear-sighted urgency remains undimmed today.  
**Kaleem Aftab, _Sight & Sound_, June 2021**  

**MANDABI (THE MONEY ORDER)**  
_Director_: Ousmane Sembène  
_Production Companies_: Filmi Doomireew, Comptoir Français du Film Production  
_Participation_: Ministère de la Coopération  
_Executive Producer_: Robert de Nesle  
_Producer_: Ousmane Sembène  
_Unit Production Manager_: Ibrahima Barro  
_Production Managers_: Jean Maumy, Paul S. Vieyra  
_Production Secretary_: Awa Sylla  
_Assistant Director_: Babakar Samb  
_Script Supervisor_: Anne-Marie Rochas  
_Script_: Ousmane Sembène  
_Director of Photography_: Paul Soulignac  
_Camera Operators_: Maya Bracher, J. Karistan  
_Assistant Camera Operator_: Issa Tiaw  
_Gaffer_: Emile Ganem  
_Assistant Gaffers_: Dia Cherif, J. Diatta  
_Editors_: Gilou Kikoïne, Max Saldinger  
_Laboratory_: GTC
_Music:_ Ousmane Sembène  
_Sound_: Henry Molihe  
_Sound Assistant_: El Hadji Mbow  
_Boom Operator_: Mawa Gay  

**Cast**  
Makhouredia Gueye _(Ibrahima Dieng)_  
Yunus Ndiay _(Méty, 1st wife)_  
Isseu Niang _(Aram, 2nd wife)_  
Mustafa Ture _(M’barka, shopkeeper)_  
Farre Sar _(businessman)_  
Serine Ndiay _(Imam)_  
Mussa Diuf _(Abdou, the nephew)_  
Serigne Sow _(Maissa)_  
Christof Colomb _(water merchant)_  
Madoun Faye _(postman)_  
Mamadu Cisoko  
Therese Bas _(Dieng’s sister)_
Ousmane Sembène  

Senegal/France 1968  
93 mins  
<br>
**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**  
**All the President’s Men**  
Fri 1 Jul 20:25; Tue 5 Jul 18:00; Sat 9 Jul 17:45  
**Battleship Potemkin (Bronenosets Potemkin)**  
Sat 2 Jul 11:50 (with live piano accompaniment); Fri 22 Jul 18:30 and Mon 25 Jul 20:50 (with Edmund Meisel score)  
**Pandora’s Box (Die Büchse der Pandora)**  
Sat 2 Jul 15:10 and Sat 16 Jul 12:20 (with Peer Raben score); Sun 31 Jul 15:20 (with live piano accompaniment)  
**Theorem (Teorema)**  
Sat 2 Jul 20:50; Mon 4 Jul 20:50; Tue 26 Jul 18:00  
**Rome Open City (Roma città aperta)**  
Sun 3 Jul 13:10; Mon 18 Jul 18:20; Wed 27 Jul 20:40  
**To Sleep with Anger**  
Wed 6 Jul 18:15 (+ intro); Fri 8 Jul 18:10  
**Day of Wrath (Vredens Dag)**  
Thu 7 Jul 18:15; Mon 11 Jul 20:30  
**Blue Velvet**  
Thu 7 Jul 20:40; Sun 17 Jul 18:30; Fri 29 Jul 20:40  
**Matewan**  
Fri 8 Jul 20:25; Tue 19 Jul 18:00  
**Manhunter**  
Fri 8 Jul 20:40; Thu 21 Jul 18:20; Sat 23 Jul 20:40  
**His Girl Friday**  
Sun 10 Jul 16:50; Wed 20 Jul 18:20 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large); Thu 28 Jul 20:45  
**The Scarlet Empress**  
Wed 13 Jul18:10 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large); Sun 24 Jul 13:20  
**The Piano**  
Thu 14 Jul 14:20; Sat 23 Jul 17:50; Sat 30 Jul 11:45  
**Mandabi (The Money Order)**  
Fri 15 Jul 20:40; Wed 27 Jul 18:10  

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
