---
layout: post
title: To Die For
published: true
date: 2022-05-14
readtime: true
categories: ['WOMAN WITH A MOVIE CAMERA']
tags: [Comedy, Crime]
metadata: 'USA/UK/Canada 1995, 107 mins<br> Director: Gus Van Sant'
pdf: '2022-05-14-to-die-for.pdf'
---

_+ intro by Hannah Strong_<br>

**SPOILER WARNING  The following notes give away some of the plot.**<br>
Nicole Kidman plays Suzanne not merely as a bimbo, but as a woman who has concentrated down to one obsessively narrow focus, leaving herself brain-and-heart-dead outside it. At one point, as Larry talks to her about having kids, her subjective angle shot of him shrinks to a tight circle around his head – expressive both of the gun she plans to have aimed at him, and of her tunnel-vision.<br>

Kidman’s exactly gauged – and very funny – performance is matched by those of her co-actors, none of whom is allowed to go over the top. Matt Dillon works a sympathetic variation on his preening grunge-rocker from _Singles_, genuinely touching in his starry-eyed inability to recognise the monster he is married to. There’s a fine display of caustic disbelief from Illeana Douglas as his sister Janice, and an unbilled George Segal puts in a creepily avuncular appearance as a predatory television executive. As Lydia, the student least likely to, Alison Folland makes an impressive screen debut: graceless, lumpy, her mouth permanently adroop, she trots round after Suzanne in doggy devotion, seeing everything and understanding nothing.<br>

Much of _To Die For_’s mordant wit derives from its fluent editing, deftly juxtaposing the various displaced narratives – voice-over, screen interview, reported speech – with the deglamorised reality. ‘It was the most exciting time of my life,’ Lydia’s voice over tells us, as we see her drearily minding Suzanne’s lapdog while Suzanne and Jimmy are exercising the bedsprings. As Larry begs abjectly for his life before being blown away, the scene is intercut with Suzanne on television, concluding her usual weather report with a fulsome ‘special greeting to my husband’, having chosen their first wedding anniversary for his death date.<br>

These gags, glittering black comedy in themselves, are also intrinsic to the film’s theme – that television, far from offering access to some inner truth, as Suzanne believes, distorts and devalues, sacrificing insight to facile celebrity. Even the most unpromising material can be turned to account. At the end of the film, with Suzanne dead, Lydia of all people is groomed for telestardom. As we watch, her image quadruples and finally fills the screen in multiple postage-stamp reproduction. Meanwhile Suzanne gazes sightlessly out through the ice – preserved, as she always wished, in frozen perfection behind a transparent screen.<br>
**Philip Kemp, _Sight and Sound_, November 1995**

**TO DIE FOR**<br>
_Directed by:_ Gus Van Sant<br>
_©:_ Columbia Pictures Industries Inc.<br>
_Presented by:_ Columbia Pictures, Rank Film Distributors<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Jonathan Taplin, Joseph M. Caracciolo<br>
_Produced by:_ Laura Ziskin<br>
_Co-producers:_ Sandy Isaac, Leslie Morgan<br>
_Unit Production Manager:_ Steven J.D. Wakefield<br>
_Production Co-ordinator:_ Regina Robb<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Carole A. Wattles<br>
_Location Manager:_ Gordon Yang<br>
_Production Secretary:_ Shauna Jamison<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ David Webb<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Kathryn Buck<br>
_Casting by:_ Howard Feuer<br>
_Screenplay by:_ Buck Henry<br>
_Based on the book by:_ Joyce Maynard<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Eric Alan Edwards<br>
_Camera Operator:_ Perry Hoffmann<br>
_1st Assistant Camera:_ Michael Hall<br>
_2nd Assistant Camera:_ Kevin Dutchak<br>
_Chief Lighting Technician:_ Steve Ferrier<br>
_Key Grip:_ Mark Manchester<br>
_Stills Photographer:_ Kerry Hayes<br>
_Special Effects:_ Laird McMurray Film Service<br>
_Death Sequence Eye Effects:_ Chel White<br>
_Edited by:_ Curtiss Clayton<br>
_Associate Editors:_ Amy E. Duddleston, Craig Hayes<br>
_Production Designer:_ Missy Stewart<br>
_Art Director:_ Vlasta Svoboda<br>
_Set Decorator:_ Carol A. Lavoie<br>
_Property Master:_ Ken Clark<br>
_Construction Co-ordinator:_ Henry Ilola<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Beatrix Aruna Pasztor<br>
_Wardrobe Supervisor:_ Delphine White<br>
_Make-up:_ Patricia Green<br>
_Hair Stylist:_ David R. Beecroft<br>
_Title Sequence by:_ Pablo Ferro<br>
_Titles/Opticals by:_ Cinema Research Corporation<br>
_Colour Timer:_ Gloria Kaiser<br>
_Music by:_ Danny Elfman<br>
_Orchestra Conducted by:_ Richard Stone<br>
_Orchestration:_ Edgardo Simone, Steve Bartek<br>
_Music Editor:_ Ellen Segal<br>
_Recorded/Mixed by:_ Robert Fernandez, Bill Jackson<br>
_Music Consultant:_ Jeffrey Pollack<br>
_Production Mixer:_ Owen Langevin<br>
_Boom Operators:_ Denis Bellingham, Jim Thompson<br>
_Re-recording Mixers:_ David Parker, Michael Semanick<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Kelley Baker<br>
_Sound Effects Editors:_ Peter Appleton, Mary Bauer, David Cohen<br>
_ADR by:_ Burton Sharp<br>
_Dialect Coach:_ Carla Meyer<br>
_Animal Trainers:_ Diane McWhinnie, Jacqueline Parkin<br>
_Unit Publicist:_ Amanda Brand<br>

**Cast**<br>
Nicole Kidman _(Suzanne Stone Maretto)_<br>
Joaquin Phoenix _(Jimmy Emmett)_<br>
Casey Affleck _(Russell Hines)_<br>
Illeana Douglas _(Janice Maretto)_<br>
Alison Folland _(Lydia Mertz)_<br>
Dan Hedaya _(Joe Maretto)_<br>
Wayne Knight _(Ed Grant)_<br>
Kurtwood Smith _(Earl Stone)_<br>
Holland Taylor _(Carol Stone)_<br>
Maria Tucci _(Angela Maretto)_<br>
Susan Traylor _(Faye Stone)_<br>
Tim Hopper _(Mike Warden)_<br>
Michael Rispoli _(Ben DeLuca)_<br>
Matt Dillon _(Larry Maretto)_<br>
Buck Henry _(Mr H. Finlaysson)_<br>
Gerry Quigley _(George)_<br>
Tom Forrester, Alan Edward Lewis _(fishermen)_<br>
Nadine MacKinnon _(sexy woman)_<br>
Conrad Coates _(weaselly guy)_<br>
Ron Gabriel _(Sal)_<br>
Ian Heath, Graeme Millington, Sean Ryan _(students)_<br>
Nicholas Pasco _(detective)_<br>
Joyce Maynard _(Suzanne's lawyer)_<br>
David Collins, Eve Crawford, Janet Lo _(reporters)_<br>
David Cronenberg _(man at lake)_<br>
Tom Quinn _(skating promoter)_<br>
Peter Glenn _(priest)_<br>
Amber-Lee Campbell _(Suzanne aged 5)_<br>
Colleen Williams _(Valerie Mertz)_<br>
Simon Richards _(Chester)_<br>
Philip Williams _(Babe Hines)_<br>
Susan Backs _(June Hines)_<br>
Kyra Harper _(Mary Emmett)_<br>
Adam Roth _(band member)_<br>
Andrew Scott _(band member)_<br>
Tamara Gorski, Katie Griffin, Carla Renee _(girls at bar)_<br>
Misha _(Walter the dog)_<br>

USA/UK/Canada 1995<br>
107 mins<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
