---
layout: post
title: The River
published: true
date: 2022-05-04
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USA 1951, 99 mins<br> Director: Jean Renoir'
pdf: '2022-05-04-river.pdf'
---

_+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large (Wednesday 4 May only)_

Jean Renoir worked with Rumer Godden to adapt her novel, a portrait of an English family living in Bengal towards the end of the Raj. The film comes close to documentary in its contemplative realism, and is partly about the pains and pleasures of young love as experienced by several young women, partly about the cyclical nature of life and death. It boasts remarkable Technicolor camerawork by the director’s brother Claude.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**<br>

**A contemporary review**<br>
The career of Jean Renoir has often seemed an enigma. His reputation is, justly, high, but so few of his films have really satisfied. Of the pre-war French films, only the bitter tragicomedy _La Règle du jeu_, and the beautiful _Partie de campagne_, can be called unqualified successes. Much of _La Grande Illusion_ still looks impressive, but the film itself is incomplete. Many of the others have wonderful moments, but as a whole they are disappointingly untidy, episodic, even garbled: yet there is hardly one which does not suggest a great talent. In America Renoir seemed to acquire more technical discipline, sometimes wasted on unworthy subjects, but in _Swamp Water_ (finished by another director) and, more especially, _The Southerner_, his observation of the South had power and atmosphere. He is said to dislike the streamlined production methods of Hollywood, and it is certainly true that, more polished and better shaped though _The Southerner_ may be, one would still exchange it for _Les Bas fonds_ or La Bête humaine. His new film, besides, makes it clear that we should accept Renoir for what he is-an imperfectionist, with talent great enough to contain the kind of faults that few directors today would dare to commit.

_The River_, which Renoir shot in India, in Technicolor, from a novel by Rumer Godden, and with a largely unfamiliar cast, has been acquired for release in this country by United Artists. It shows Renoir’s talent in full flower, the film of a humanist and a poet, and in its tender intuition, affectionate understanding, follows the line of his most memorable work. As in his best American films he absorbed and reflected a new locale, so here – with more leisure, more freedom – he creates, with evident fascination, an Indian background. Nearly all the main characters, however, are English, and the film is a gentle, episodic evocation of an English household in a Bengal village on the Ganges. The central figure, and the narrator, is Harriet, a girl of fourteen; on the fringe of adolescent experience when the story opens, she is taken by events to its centre. The mother and father, her young brother and two little sisters, remain in the background. In the foreground are herself, Valerie, a girl of seventeen, and a half-caste girl, all rivals for the affections of a young American who has come to stay in the village. All three girls fall romantically, impermanently in love with the young man, who has lost a leg in the war, and is secretly lonely, uncertain, embittered. Harriet, writing poems in an exercise book, plain and awkward, is mortified by Valerie’s beauty, arrogance and success; the half-caste girl, with a more mature understanding, comes closer than the others to Captain John. And Captain John finally goes away again.

The slightness of the story is filled out by the richness of the background, and a constant series of events, some everyday, some important. Playing quoits with Captain John, Valerie humiliates him by causing him to fall and lie helplessly on the ground. The little brother, who spends his days with an Indian boy trying to charm snakes, is stung by one and killed. Dismayed by her first experience of death and love, Harriet takes a skiff out on the river at night, tries to kill herself, is picked up by fishermen and enjoyably consoled by Captain John. And the river, used as a symbol of time, life, the world, flows calmly and broadly on.

It is, deliberately, a westerner’s view. Renoir communicates landscapes and customs as a charmed outsider, and reinforces this impression by using the English girl as narrator. A marriage dance ceremony, the colour and excitement of a market, the exquisite landscapes and the ragged beggars, a firework ritual, a simple act of idolatry, all these are observed with a clear enchantment. Against this background Renoir sets the leisure and the quietness of the English household as the old waltzes the children play on their gramophone are contrasted with the village music. The drama of the whole film is, in a sense, as alien to its background as the waltz to the Indian music: a nostalgic, retrospective sketch of childhood and adolescence, stemming from a novel that is, basically, of today’s ever so sensitive female school, but given a purity of feeling by Renoir’s own personality. Its core, perhaps, is contained in the speech of the half-caste girl’s white father, when he hears of the little boy’s death and muses on the innocence and simplicity of childhood, finding a beauty, even a satisfaction, in the death itself. Both the half-caste girl and her father are new characters, not in the original novel, and they strengthen the central situation.

Not all of this, it must be said, is satisfactorily done. Renoir has made little attempt to shape his material. The film starts confusingly, overburdened by narration, slow to establish any direction or purpose. Its episodes are often carelessly linked together, scenes end with disconcerting abruptness, and one or two sequences – notably the children’s party – undoubtedly suffer from untidy direction. Some of the acting is no more than adequate. Patricia Walters (Harriet) and Thomas Breen (Captain John) are perhaps the weakest; the latter in particular has not the charm his part requires. Esmond Knight is peculiarly, though briefly, stilted as the father. The Indian actress, Radha, is charming, and wonderful in the dance sequence; and Adrienne Corri as Valerie shows beauty, force and much personality – though there are traces of inexperience in her acting.

The imperfections are undeniable, and at times really distracting; yet there is something marvellous about a film that can hold and entrance one in spite of them. The final sequences are, fortunately, the most sustained, and with the little boy’s open air funeral, and the episodes that follow, _The River_ moves to a rare depth and intensity. Previously it has attained this only at certain moments – the beautiful sequence of the dance, of the afternoon siesta, of the fireworks in the garden – and its continuity is most firmly established by Claude Renoir’s colour photography, as lovely and expressive as any yet recorded. It ranges from the gaudiness of the market scenes and the opulent dance sequence, to the mysterious blue shades of the river at night and the delicate, pale landscapes.

Memorable alone in a contemporary film, _The River_ does not contain one disagreeable character. Instead, one is aware of the sympathy, the wisdom and understanding of a remarkable artist who loves human beings.<br>
**Gavin Lambert, _Sight and Sound_, March 1952**<br>

**THE RIVER**<br>
_Directed by:_ Jean Renoir  
_©/Production Company:_ Oriental International Films  
_A presentation of the:_ Theatre Guild  
_Produced by:_ Kenneth McEldowney  
_Production Manager:_ Kalyan Gupta  
_Personal Assistant to Jean Renoir:_ Eleanor Wolquitt  
_Production Assistant:_ Subrata Mitra *  
_Assistant Directors:_ Harishadhan J. Das Gupta, Sukhamoy Sen, Bansi Ashe  
_Assistant Director:_ Satyajit Ray *  
_Assistant to Mr Renoir:_ Forrest Judd  
_Screenplay by:_ Rumer Godden, Jean Renoir  
_Based on the novel by:_ Rumer Godden  
_Director of Photography:_ Claude Renoir  
_Camera Operator:_ Ramananda Sen Gupta  
_Editor:_ George Gale  
_Production Designer:_ Eugène Lourié  
_Set Designer:_ Bansi Chandragupta  
_Music:_ M. A. Partha Sarathy  
_Sitarist:_ Subrata Mitra *  
_Sound Engineers:_ Charles Poulton, Charles Knott  
_Technical Adviser:_ M. A. Partha Sarathy  
_Narrator:_ June Hillman<br>

**Cast**<br>
Nora Swinburne _(the mother)_  
Esmond Knight _(the father)_  
Arthur Shields _(Mr John)_  
Thomas E. Breen _(Captain John)_  
Suprova Mukerjee _(Nan)_  
Patricia Walters _(Harriet)_  
Radha _(Melanie)_  
Adrienne Corri _(Valerie)_  
Richard Foster _(Bogie)_  
Penelope Wilkinson _(Elizabeth)_  
Jane Harris _(Muffie)_  
Jennifer Harris _(Mouse)_  
Cecelia Wood _(Victoria)_  
Ram Singh _(Sajjan Singh)_  
Nimai Barik _(Kanu)_  
Trilak Jetley _(Anil)_<br>

  
USA 1951©<br>
99 mins<br>


**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**A Farewell to Arms**<br>
Sun 1 May 12:00; Mon 16 May 18:15; Tue 24 May 20:50<br>
**Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans**<br>
Mon 2 May 12:20; Mon 30 May 18:20<br>
**Tokyo Story (Tokyo Monogatari)**<br>
Tue 3 May 14:30; Sat 7 May 15:00; Sat 21 May 11:10; Wed 25 May 18:00<br>
**The River**<br>
Wed 4 May 18:10 + intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large; Sun 15 May 15:10<br>
**El Sur (The South)**<br>
Thu 5 May 14:30; Mon 16 May 18:10<br>
**Daughters of the Dust**<br>
Fri 6 May 20:50; Fri 20 May 14:40; Thu 26 May 20:40<br>
**Syndromes and a Century (Sang sattawaat)**<br>
Sat 7 May 18:10; Thu 12 May 20:50<br>
**Still Walking (Aruitemo aruitemo)**<br>
Sun 8 May 15:15; Wed 11 May 17:50 + intro by Dr Alexander Jacoby, Senior Lecturer in Japanese Studies; Mon 23 May 20:45<br>
**The Long Day Closes**<br>
Mon 9 May 18:30; Sun 22 May 12:30; Thu 26 May 20:50<br>
**Journey to Italy (Viaggio in Italia)**<br>
Tue 10 May 20:50; Thu 19 May 18:10; Wed 25 May 20:50; Fri 27 May 18:20<br>
**The Umbrellas of Cherbourg (Les Parapluies de Cherbourg)**<br>
Fri 13 May 20:45; Tue 17 May 20:50; Sat 28 May 18:15<br>
**Cleo from 5 to 7 (Cléo de 5 à 7)**<br>
Sat 14 May 14:45; Wed 18 May 18:10 + intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large<br>
**The Miracle Worker**<br>
Tue 17 May 14:30; Sun 29 May 11:20<br>
**The Incredible Shrinking Man**<br>
Thu 19 May 14:30; Tue 31 May 18:20<br>



**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
