---
layout: post
title: Out of the Unkown<br>The Chopper
published: true
date: 2022-04-03
readtime: true
categories: ['NIGHTMARES & DAYDREAMS<br>A CENTENARY CELEBRATION OF SCREENWRITER NIGEL KNEALE']
tags: [Drama]
metadata:
pdf: '2022-04-03-chopper.pdf'
---

Join us for a very special table reading of one of Nigel Kneale’s most coveted lost dramas, _The Chopper_, made as part of the BBC’s sci-fi anthology drama series _Out of the Unknown_. A mechanic who converts motorbikes into custom choppers finds that his latest assignment is haunted by the bike’s last owner.

The cast will be as follows:

Jimmy: Matthew Waterhouse

Chaser: Tom Hillenbrand

Sandie: Madelyn Smedley

Molloy: Richard Holliss

Lorna: Brenda Joyce

Stage Directions: Miles Eady

**Out of the Unknown**<br>
In 1962 the ITV company ABC aired a science fiction anthology series, _Out of This World_. It was a high-profile production and was well received. Two years later, the creative force behind the series, Sydney Newman, became head of the BBC’s fledgling drama department, which was facing a 40% increase in output due to the creation of a new channel, BBC2. Pressed for ideas, Newman returned to the concept of an anthology series of science fiction and fantasy plays.

The result was _Out of the Unknown_ (BBC, 1965-71, 49 episodes), a mixture of original screenplays and adaptations of stories by distinguished authors including Isaac Asimov, J.G. Ballard, Ray Bradbury, Robert Sheckley and Frederick Pohl. Nigel Kneale, famous for writing the 1950s Quatermass adventures, also contributed a script, _The Chopper_, for the show’s fourth and final season.<br>
**Anthony Clark, BFI Screenonline, screenonline.org.uk**<br>
<br>

**NIGHTMARES & DAYDREAMS<br>
A CENTENARY CELEBRATION OF SCREENWRITER NIGEL KNEALE**<br>
**The Abominable Snowman**<br>
Mon 28 Mar 20:50; Sat 23 Apr 14:50<br>
**Wuthering Heights**<br>
Sat 2 Apr 15:10<br>
**Missing Believed Wiped: Out of the Unknown: The Chopper**<br>
Sun 3 Apr 18:00<br>
**Nineteen Eighty-Four + Panel Discussion: Nineteen Eighty-Four and the legacy of Nigel Kneale**<br>
Mon 4 Apr 18:30<br>
**Seniors Free Matinee: Quatermass and the Pit + discussion**<br>
Mon 11 Apr 14:00<br>
**The Year of the Sex Olympics**<br>
Tue 12 Apr 18:10<br>
**First Men in the Moon**<br>
Fri 15 Apr 14:30; Wed 27 Apr 20:50<br>
**The Woman in Black**<br>
Sun 24 Apr 14:40<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  
<br>

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
