---
layout: post
title: Bent
published: true
date: 2022-09-27
readtime: true
categories: ['BFI FLARE']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'K/USA/Japan 1996, 116 mins<br> Director: Sean Mathias'
pdf: '2022-09-27-bent.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with director Sean Mathias, writer Martin Sherman and actor Ian McKellen_

**Contains strong violence and upsetting scenes.**

One night in 1930s Berlin, a promiscuous gay man Max (Clive Owen) makes a decision that puts him and his boyfriend in great danger, forcing them to flee the city. Sean Mathias’s adaptation of Martin Sherman’s Tony-nominated play is a heartrending story of the persecution of gay people in Nazi Germany.  
**bfi.org.uk**  

In their quest for a racial purity purged of corrupting inﬂuences, the Nazis industrialised degradation, torture and murder. To make their prison camps into death factories mass-producing corpses necessitated an element of mob psychology, and that makes Nazism difﬁcult to represent through individual encounters. The larger cruelty can only be glimpsed through smaller acts of brutality, perpetuated, as in _Bent_ by types rather than characters. One corrupt camp commandant stands for a whole regime of murder. (It’s revealing that one of the most painful ﬁctional accounts of the concentration camps, Art Spiegelman’s _Maus_, is a comic featuring cartoon mice: not much realism there.)

Realism’s need to personalise gives rise to the set of signals which regularly stand for Nazi inhumanity: here, jackboots, belts tightly cinched round leather great coats, chiselled jawlines, and a cool, clear gaze preﬁguring bullying sadism. It’s to the credit of _Bent_ that it’s fully aware how closely that iconography approximates certain homoerotic images. These Nazis are beautiful pin-ups made ﬂesh, yet they yield their power with consummate cruelty. We get a real sense of the salivating prurience just beneath the surface of their intolerance of another sexuality.

Martin Sherman’s adaptation of his own 1979 play retains a theatricality, but the movie is in no way constrained by that, repeatedly breaking free to enter a realm of painfully hallucinatory spaces. If director Sean Mathias encloses most of the action in tightly framed verbal encounters, the effect is all the greater when the screen does open up. The seething, tainted sensuality of Greta’s club is conventionally contrived, but there’s a weird air of carnival, or at least circus about it, only heightened by the sight of Mick Jagger in drag singing from a trapeze. Jagger’s presence may be a commercial sop, but his eerie transformation from the dangerous ﬁgure of Greta to the utterly safe George produces a neat cameo that Mathias is at pains not to overplay.

The movie’s arresting imagery is nowhere more apparent than when protagonist Max is carrying rocks from one pile to another and back. Prisons are usually represented as claustrophobic, but here we feel, in an almost physical way, the sheer belittling pointlessness of Max’s solitary labour as the camera ﬁnds his tiny ﬁgure in the distance, trudging endlessly back and forth in a vast monochrome chamber, a disused furnace, I’d guess, here standing in for who knows what bleak prison facility. In fact, Mathias repeatedly makes telling use of modern industrial wasteland as a visual correlative of the shattered fabric of Nazi Germany.

Perhaps less convincing is the script’s suggestion that the Nazis’ persecution of gays was even more vicious than their anti-Semitism. In this context, establishing a hierarchy becomes all but meaningless. Perhaps it’s a narrative device to allow Max to appear in a less than ﬂattering light: after masquerading as a Jew to avoid the worse treatment, he ﬁnally comes out in the most painful way.

As Max, Clive Owen has the onanistic insouciance of the sex object, but he’s not quite so convincing as a prisoner: a shaven head and sunken cheeks suit him rather too well. Lothaire Bluteau, on the other hand, is remarkable, his features charged with rodent intensity, notably when Horst and Max bring each other to orgasm in the prison yard, neither man touching the other, or indeed, himself. At such moments, Nazi persecution slips gently into the background, to be replaced by an extraordinary love story. It’s no disgrace that _Bent_ renders that story as movingly as it reminds us of the depths of Nazi hatred.  
**Nick Kimberly, _Sight & Sound_, March 1998**  

**BENT**  
_Director:_ Sean Mathias  
_Production Companies:_ Channel Four Television Corporation, Nippon Film Development & Finance, Channel 4 Films, Ask Kodansha Co, Arts Council of England  
_Executive Producers:_ Sarah Radclyffe, Hisami Kuroiwa  
_Producers:_ Michael Solinger, Dixie Linder  
_Co-producers:_ Sean Mathias, Martin Sherman  
_Production Supervisor:_ Gina Carter  
_Production Co-ordinator:_ Sophie Fante  
_Location Manager:_ Michael Harm  
_Post-production Supervisor, re-cut:_ Christian Martin *  
_1st Assistant Director:_ Davina Nicholson  
_Script Supervisor:_ Liz West  
_Casting Director:_ Andy Pryor  
_Screenplay/Original Play:_ Martin Sherman  
_Director of Photography:_ Giorgos Arvanitis  
_Steadicam Operator:_ Roger Tooley  
_Effects Producer:_ Alan Church  
_Effects Compositor:_ Matthew Twyford  
_Visual Effects Supervisor:_ Frédéric Moreau  
_Special Effects:_ John Markwell  
_Editor:_ Isabel Lorente  
_Production Designer:_ Stephen Brimson Lewis  
_Art Director:_ Andrew Golding  
_Costume Designer:_ Stewart Meachem  
_Chief Make-up Artist:_ Trefor Proud  
_Chief Hairdresser:_ Sarah Love  
_Titles Designer:_ Simon Giles  
_Digital Opticals/Titles:_ Film Factory at VTR  
_Music:_ Philip Glass  
_Featuring:_ The Emerson String Quartet  
_Violins:_ Eugene Drucker, Philip Setzer  
_Viola:_ Lawrence Dutton  
_Cello:_ David Finckel  
_Solo Piano:_ Michael Riesman  
_Cello Additional Soloist:_ David Finckel  
_Violin Additional Soloist:_ Phil Setzer  
_Clarinet Additional Soloist:_ Andrew Sterman  
_Conductor:_ Michael Riesman  
_Choreography:_ Wayne McGregor  
_Sound Recording:_ Simon Bishop  
_Re-recording Mixers:_ Paul Carr, Robert Farr  
_Sound Editor:_ Gerard McCann  
_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Tom Delmar  
_Animal Handler:_ Dave Stewart  

**Cast**  
Lothaire Bluteau _(Horst)_  
Clive Owen _(Max)_  
Brian Webber _(Rudy)_  
Ian McKellen _(Uncle Freddie)_  
Mick Jagger _(Greta/George)_  
Nikolaj Waldau _(Wolf)_  
Jude Law _(stormtrooper)_  
Gresby Nash _(waiter)_  
Suzanne Bertish _(half-woman, half-man)_  
David Meyer _(Gestapo man)_  
Stefan Marling _(SS Captain)_  
Richard Laing, Crispian Belfrage _(SS guards)_  
Johanna Kirby _(muttering woman)_  
David Phelan _(fluff in park)_  
Peter Stark _(guard on train 1)_  
Rupert Graves _(officer on train)_  
Charlie Watts _(guard on train 2)_  
Holly Davidson _(girl on train)_  
Rupert Penry Jones _(guard on road)_  
Paul Kynman _(corporal)_  
Paul Bettany _(captain)_  
Claire Cunningham, Shira Haviv, Filip van Huffel, Sacha Lee, Ben Maher, Jane Mason _(Random Dance Companies)_  
Nat _(flame throwing man)_  
Packer _(happy sad man)_  
Ernesto _(leaping man)_  
Myer Taub _(Rudy’s dresser)_  
Geraldine Sherman, Rachel Weisz _(prostitutes)  _
Mary Davidson, Sadie Frost, Lou Gish, Simon Hammerstein, Johan Johnstone, Chris Karlitz, Mark Misauer, Howard Sacks, Mandy Stone, William Stone, Daisy de Villeneuve, Poppy de Villeneuve, Jan de Villeneuve, Helen Whitehouse, Zed _(Max’s friends)_  

UK/USA/Japan 1996©  
116 mins  

\* Uncredited  
<br>
**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
