---
layout: post
title: Cow
published: true
date: 2022-03-08
readtime: true
categories: ['THE CAMERA IS OURS<br>BRITAIN’S WOMEN DOCUMENTARY MAKERS']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'UK 2021, 94 mins<br> Director: Andrea Arnold'
pdf: '2022-03-08-cow.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with director Andrea Arnold_

**Director’s Notes – Andrea Arnold**  
Whenever I have felt troubled or lost or overwhelmed with life, I have always sought nature. It has always grounded me and put me in touch with myself again.

No one taught me this. It came quite naturally. Like some innate knowledge. Partly I think because I had a very free childhood. My mum had me very young, at 16, and three siblings followed by the time she was 22. My dad was only a few years older. I never saw him that much in my early years and he was gone completely by time I was ten.

So unsupervised most of the time I lived a fantastically wild life. I grew up in North Kent on an estate surrounded by liminal wilderness. From early on I played out and would spend entire days roaming wherever the fancy took me. Between estates and chalk pits and deserted old industrial spaces and woods and motorways. Out of this grew a deep love of insects and birds and animals and plants. Stray estate dogs, the traveller ponies chained by the motorway, the fish and frogs in the water-filled bombsite, wild strawberries on the banks of the chalk pits. I can conjure up these places vividly now. The smells and sounds and feels and colours.

We had pets. Lots. No one really stopped us bringing animals home. One day when I was eight or so I went into a house where there was a litter of puppies.  I felt sorry for the tiny runt so took him home. I didn’t ask anyone if I could.  I just assumed I could. Like us he roamed. Never owned a lead or collar ever. None of our dogs did. He did his own thing and got into a whole load of trouble. But that is another story.

We really loved our animals but none arrived in a conventional way or got cared for in a conventional way. I had gerbils but didn’t have a cage so they lived in a clothes drawer. Jumpers, underwear, gerbils. My dad sometimes sold stuff in Brick Lane Market in London. One time he took me with him and someone was selling a lamb that no one wanted. As we were leaving I pleaded for it and we took it home. It grew huge living on our overgrown, backyard grass. And was often in the house too. Baaing if anyone knocked on the door.

I left home at 18 to live in London. Life changed dramatically in many ways. The city and pressures of adult life changed my relationship with nature.  It wasn’t so immediate or accessible in the city. I continued to seek it as it mattered to me in a fundamental way. I learned to drive and drove out to it. Kept a stray dog I found in the street. Had cats. But I guess as I got busier with life I began to feel less connected. Nature sometimes felt like something that was ‘over there’. I would gaze out of train and car windows on my way somewhere feeling a little bereft. Separated.

One of the animals I saw most out of those windows are cows. Cows grazing in green fields. Pastoral, peaceful, romantic. Like a painting. I wondered about the reality of their lives and what that was really like. Making _Cow_ the film emerged from that curiosity. Cows are so much part of our lives. They provide us with so much. But I felt disconnected from them. I liked the idea of jumping into that familiar scene. Seeing what their reality really was.

Before we started filming an international and prominent bunch of scientists signed The Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness in which they proclaimed that animals are conscious and aware to the degree that humans are. They said the evidence was overwhelming.

What does that mean? Do they feel pain, fear, desire, anger, affection, loss, frustration, empathy, and intention? Like humans do? Are they individuals?  Do they have distinct personalities? In all my relationships with animals they for sure feel like they have distinct likes and dislikes and individual quirks. So what about the animals we use for food? Cows? I wondered if we watched a cow long enough we would see any of this? I didn’t want in any way to attempt to get inside her head or suggest human emotions. I just wanted to watch her reactions to her daily reality. In all of its beauty and challenges and brutality. To look. To see. To see her.

Dairy cows work hard. They spend their lives giving birth and making milk. A lifetime of maternal existence. They will bear maybe 10 to 20 calves but each time the calf is taken shortly after birth so the milk can be used for us.

One time at the seaside in Denmark I was using a stick to flick beached and still alive jellyfish back in the water. There were lots and it was taking a while.  A couple walked by holding hands. Watched me for a while and then said. ‘You shouldn’t bother. Leave them to die. It’s nature.’ I replied without thinking, ‘I know but I’m nature too and I’m putting them back.’

We are nature. We are animals. The top of the food chain. But we are still animals and we have many animal instincts. Denying this, separating ourselves and disconnecting from this is starting to seem more and more at our peril. Our relationship with the millions of non-human lives we use is very much part of our existence. I made _Cow_ to invite engagement with that.

My childish wanderings and love for animals was I think something very instinctive and natural and honest. I wasn’t restrained by anyone and so followed my own expression. And my relationship with nature as a kid wasn’t just a romantic, whimsical one. It was engaged and immersive. There was both joy and pain. It was real.

I hope this film in some small way can connect anyone who sees it not just to cows and other non-human conscious animals but to that deep knowing and animal nature in ourselves. That we are all connected to everything living.  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**COW**  
_Directed by_: Andrea Arnold  
_A_ Cow Film _production_  
_Production Company_: Halcyon Pictures  
_Presented by_: BBC Film  
_In association with_: Doc Society  
_International Sales_: MK2 Films  
_US and Canada Sales_: Submarine Entertainment  
_Executive Producers_: Rose Garnett,  Maxyne Franklin, Sandra Whipham  
_Produced by_: Kat Mansoor  
_Assistant Producers_: Emily Burrett,  Charlie Falconer, Tessa Morgan  
_Line Producer_: Joanna Riding  
_For BBC Film: Head of Production and Finance_: Michael Wood; _Head of Legal and Business Affairs_: Geraldine Atlee; _Legal and Business Affairs Manager_: Helen Giles; _Head of Communications_: Emma Hewitt; _Production Executive_: Emma Kayee; _Legal & Finance Assistant_: Ruth Sanders  
_Production Accountant_: Nyman Libson Paul  
_Production Bookkeeper_: Iris Fraser  
_Post Production Manager for Goldcrest_: Rob Farris  
_Researchers_: Jessica Gutch, Luke Moody, Stephanie Pochet  
_Director of Photography_: Magda Kowalczyk  
_Digital Image Technician_: Ian Pinder  
_Camera Assistant_: Miha Lungu  
_Electricians_: Andy Cole, Alex Macauley  
_Electrician Assistant_: Kae Ho  
_Stills Photography_: Kate Kirkwood  
_Graphics_: Mike Ellis  
_Edited by_: Rebecca Lloyd, Jacob Schulsinger, Nicolas Chaudeurge  
_On-line Editor_: Chloe Warner-Harris  
_Edit Assistants_: Adam Lavis, Dennis Mabry  
_Titles_: Mike Ellis  
_Senior Colourist_: Rob Pizzey  
_Music Supervisors_: Simon Astall, Ben Turner  
_Sound Designers_: Raphaël Sohier,  Carolina Santana  
_Sound Supervisor_: Nicolas Becker  
_Sound Recording_: Nikky French  
_Additional Sound_: Marina Fusella  
_Mixing Engineer_: Cyril Holtz  
_Supervising Dialogue Editor_: Linda Forsén  
_Foley Artist_: Gilles Marsalet  
_Foley Recordist_: Florent Lavallée  
_Publicist_: Charles McDonald  
_Special Thanks_: Christine Langan, Jess Search

UK 2021©  
94 mins
<br><br>

**THE CAMERA IS OURS: BRITAIN’S WOMEN DOCUMENTARY MAKERS**<br>
**From Beside the Seaside to the English Inn: Restoration Programme 1 + intro  by BFI curator Ros Cranston**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 18:15<br>
**For Sama + intro by director Waad  Al-Kateab + Children of the Ruins**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 20:30<br>
**The Camera Is Ours: Study Day + Independent Miss Craigie + Q&A with director Lizzie Thynne and producer Hollie Price**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 12:00-17:00<br>
**From the Sea to the Land Beyond**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 18:15<br>
**Seniors Free Archive Matinee:  White Riot + discussion**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 14:00<br>
**Cow**<br>
Tue 8 Mar 20:40<br>
**The Hermit of Treig + Q&A with  director Lizzie MacKenzie**<br>
Fri 11 Mar 18:10<br>
**From Birth-Day to Something Nice to Eat: Restoration Programme 2 + intro by  BFI curator Ros Cranston**<br>
Mon 14 Mar 18:15<br>
**Hostile + director Sonita Gale in conversation with journalist Jon Snow**<br>
Tue 15 Mar 18:00<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE0ODg5MzY5NTMsLTU0Mzc3ODc2XX0=
-->
