---
layout: post
title: Pulp
published: true
date: 2022-05-04
readtime: true
categories: ['RETURN OF THE OUTSIDER<br>THE FILMS OF MIKE HODGES']
tags: [Thriller, Comedy]
metadata: 'UK 1972, 98 mins<br> Director: Mike Hodges'
pdf: '2022-05-04-pulp.pdf'
---

**Mike Hodges on ‘Pulp’**  
Since I first went to the cinema in the early 1950s I was always partial to  B-movies. They were short, fast, black and white in every sense, and often better than the ‘A’ films they were married to. This enthusiasm ran parallel with my discovery of the dark literature of Chandler, Cain, Conrad, West and (much despised by the cultural elite) Mickey Spillane. So, after _Get Carter_ (1971), when Michaels Klinger and Caine decided to make another film with me, I chose to write an original screenplay on spec. If they liked it then we’d make it; if not we wouldn’t. That script was _Pulp_. And they liked it!

Originally called _Memoirs of a Ghost Writer_, its conception was a rather convoluted affair. In _Rumour_, the 1969 television film that brought me to the attention of producer Michael Klinger, I’d used the voiceover technique much favoured by B-moviemakers. In this film it was the voice of a sleazy newspaper gossip columnist, a Walter Winchell replicant, that constantly revealed the discrepancy between what he was reporting and what the viewer was seeing. Deciding to use the same device was probably the first element in constructing _Pulp_’s script.

But _Rumour_ was also very political. It was about the responsibilities of a free press and how those without influence can be badly mangled by devious and malicious journalism. For the new script I was now seeking a similar political edge and it came from the most unlikely of places: Italy. I was dumbfounded when the current elections there showed strong support for the fascist party. Can it be a mere 15 years after the war that this malignant ideology re-emerged? It was barely believable.

But how to incorporate it into a narrative? It then occurred to me that many  B-movies were about another Italian institution, the Mafia, and there were many similarities between them. Unlike Hitler and Nazism, I’d always found Mussolini and Italian fascism close to comic opera. Their uniforms and strutting were comedic not sinister, even if their intentions weren’t. Intuitively, my thinking shifted to satire; more Fellini than Bertolucci.

In Italy tragedy can quickly and easily turn into comedy. In 1953 a young woman, Wilma Montesi, was found drowned on a beach 15 miles south of Rome. On the basis of very shaky evidence the communist press talked of murder and a political cover-up in an attempt to undermine the Christian Democrat government. Rumours were rife when the doctors who examined Wilma’s body contradicted each other. She was a virgin; she wasn’t a virgin; she was pregnant; her stomach was empty, was full of ice cream, was full of drugs.

Suspects were arrested then set free. Soon film stars, priests, prostitutes, members of a hunting syndicate, aristocrats all became embroiled. Even the ‘Wizard of Milan’ helped the police with their investigations. The scandal continued for years and the case remains unresolved to this day. Of course the journalists (it was the birth of the paparazzi!) had more copy than they could dream of. Along with the rest of the world, I remember following every crazy twist and turn as they unfolded. The Montesi scandal was to be the third element in my script.

The fourth was George Raft, the American actor identified with portrayals of gangsters in 1930s and 40s crime melodramas. When his career went into decline he ended up in a London casino as a greeter. Worse, his purported connections with the Mafia made it difficult for him to re-enter the US. This was the source of my first imagined character: Preston Gilbert. Preston, too, was an ex-gangster star, small of stature as many of them were, and now  exiled on an island in the Mediterranean. He was eventually to be played by Mickey Rooney.

I have, of course, omitted the one ingredient that was there from the beginning: Michael Caine. For Michael I created the character of Mickey King, a desperate writer of bad pulp novels under suggestive pseudo-names (O.R. Gan;  S. Odomy) and titles (_My Gun Is Long_; _The Organ Grinder_) who gets suckered into ghost writing (hence the original title) the biography of the faded star Preston Gilbert. The consequences of this career move have a certain irony in that King is trapped as securely as a fly on fly paper by a plot every bit as lurid as his own novels.

Once the script was accepted I went to Italy to do more research and look for locations. I visited Mussolini’s mausoleum and was led to a small shop which sold, illegally, Il Duce memorabilia. Among my purchases was an LP of his political rants which can be heard emitting from a loudspeaker van in the film’s fictional election campaign.

But when it came to choosing locations there was a problem, a big problem.  It seemed that everywhere I wanted to shoot (so the Italian production manager informed me) a protection fee would have to be paid to – yes – the Mafia. I soon realised we were going to be either taken to the cleaners, or fitted with cement slippers, so I contacted Michael Klinger and suggested we shift the whole production to Malta, an island I knew well. We did just that.

There is a literary postscript to all this. Over the years I noticed that writers in particular wanted to talk about this film. They enjoyed the labyrinthine plot, the literary jokes and political references. In 2002, seven years before he died,  J.G. Ballard happened to see a documentary I’d made about serial killer films, _Murder by Numbers_. From there we got to correspond and in one letter he revealed that he’d watched _Pulp_ at least a ‘dozen times’. He, too, remembered almost every line and visual gag; listing them in the letter. I was over the moon. Ballard was one of my all-time heroes. I loved his books, his journalism, listening to him on the radio and seeing him on television. Needless to say I’ve still got that letter, handwritten too:

Dear Mike,

Yes, _Pulp_ is a special favourite of mine – I must have watched my tape a dozen times, or more – a wonderfully witty script, and the brilliant attention to detail, as in _Get Carter_ – so many superb performances, like the typing pool manager, or Caine himself, Lionel Stander and [Al] Lettieri. Lizabeth Scott was never better, and of course best of all was the great Mickey Rooney, totally unappreciated by film critics – you drew a fantastic performance out of him, which can’t have been easy – I love the scene of his dressing, moving layers of flattering mirrors past himself – I take my hat off – ‘A tip – don’t stand too close to him’ – a great film.

Sadly, I haven’t seen _Black Rainbow_, but I’ll try to track it down. It’s great news about your new film, and the title is excellent. It sounds just right for Clive Owen, who’s slightly wooden in an interesting way – a couple of years ago Channel 5 showed a very interesting American thriller with him.

[…]

Meanwhile, best of luck with the new film – it will be great.

Best wishes,  
Jim

**Mike Hodges, bfi.org.uk, 30 August 2013**
<br><br>

**PULP**  
_Directed by_: Mike Hodges  
©: United Artists Corporation  
_Production Company_:  Three Michaels Film Productions Ltd  
_Produced by_: Michael Klinger  
_Production Supervisor_: Robert Sterne  
_London Liaison_: Tony Klinger  
_Italian Liaison_: Joe De Biasio, Claudio Cutry  
_Production Accountant_: Denton Scott  
_Assistant Director_: Michael Dryhurst  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Malcolm Stamp *  
_3rd Assistant Director_: Graham Easton *  
_Continuity_: Doreen Dearnaley  
_Casting Director_: Irene Lamb  
_Written by_: Mike Hodges  
_Director of Photography_: Ousama Rawi  
_Camera Operator_: Dusty Miller  
_Stills Photographer_: John Jay  
_Special Effects_: Ron Ballanger  
_Editor_: John Glen  
_Assistant Editor_: Max Bell *  
_Production Designer_: Patrick Downing  
_Art Director_: Darrell Lass  
_Construction Manager_: Sid Nightingale  
_Costumes Designed by_: Gitt Magrini  
_Costumes Made by_: Tirelli  
_Wardrobe Master_: Philippe Pickford  
_Make-up_: George Partleton, Paul Engelen  
_Hairdresser_: Mike Jones  
_Music Composed by_: George Martin  
_Funeral Theme played by_: St. Joseph’s Band  
_Music Conducted by_: George Martin  
_Music Recorded at_: AIR Studios (London)  
_Sound Recordist_: Christian Wangler  
_Boom Operator_: Richard Laughton *  
_Dubbing Recordist_: Gerry Humphries  
_Dubbing Editor_: Peter Horrocks  
_Unit Publicist_: Jean Lambdon

**Cast**  
Michael Caine _(Chester Thomas ‘Mickey’ King)_  
Mickey Rooney _(Preston Gilbert)_  
Lionel Stander _(Ben Dinuccio)_  
Lizabeth Scott _(Princess Betty Cippola)_  
Nadia Cassini _(Liz Adams)_  
Dennis Price _(mysterious Englishman)_  
Al Lettieri _(Jack Francis Miller)_  
Amerigo Tot _(Sotgio, the partisan)_  
Leopoldo Trieste _(Marcovic)_  
Robert Sacchi _(Jim Norman, the bogeyman)_  
Giulio Donnini _(typing pool manager)_  
Joe Zammit Cordina _(Santana, the beautiful thing)_  
Luciano Pigozzi _(Del Duce, the clairvoyant)_  
Maria Cumani Quasimodo _(Senora Pavone, the office manageress)_  
Liù Bosisio _(1st typist)_  
Cristina Gaïoni _(2nd typist, the blonde)_  
Janet Ågren _(Silvana, the publisher’s receptionist)_  
Irene Sophie Opperman _(coach hostess)_  
Iver Gilborn, Elaine Olcott _(coach tourists)_  
Ave Ninchi _(fat chambermaid)_  
Ermelinda De Felice _(woman in barber shop)_  
Werner Hasselman, Louise Lambert _(American tourists in restaurant)_  
Victor Mercieca _(Frank Cippola)_  
Cettina Borg Oliver _(Gilbert’s mother)_  
Anna Smith _(old woman in bar)_  
Cyrus Elias _(first guide)_ *  
Giuseppe Mallia _(man outside bar)_ *  
Roy Marmara _(Mario)_ *  
Louis Caruana _(Toni)_ *  
Mary Caruana _(Mae West)_ *  
Jeanne Lass _(Marlene Dietrich)_ *  
Kate Sullivan _(Joan Crawford)_ *  
Anna Pace Donnela _(Jean Harlow)_ *  
Jennifer Gauci _(Shirley Temple)_ *  
Tondi Barr _(Gloria Swanson)_ *

USA-UK 1972©  
98 mins

*Uncredited
<br><br>

**RETURN OF THE OUTSIDER:  THE FILMS OF MIKE HODGES**<br>
**The Terminal Man (director’s cut)**<br>
Mon 2 May 14:50; Mon 16 May 20:40<br>
**Mike Hodges in Conversation**<br>
Tue 3 May 18:15<br>
**Black Rainbow**<br>
Tue 3 May 20:40; Sun 22 May 18:10<br>
**Pulp**<br>
Wed 4 May 18:15; Wed 11 May 20:50<br>
**I’ll Sleep When I’m Dead**<br>
Thu 5 May 18:00; Mon 30 May 17:50<br>
**Morons from Outer Space**<br>
Fri 6 May 18:05; Wed 18 May 20:50 **+ World in Action: The Flipside**<br>
**Flash Gordon**<br>
Sat 7 May 12:00; Thu 19 May 20:20 **+ The Tyrant King: Episode 1: Scarface**<br>
**Squaring the Circle + World in Action:  Goldwater for President? or How to Win Friends and Influence People**<br>
Sun 8 May 11:50<br>
**A Prayer for the Dying**<br>
Sun 8 May 15:20; Sun 15 May 18:10<br>
**Tempo**<br>
Tue 17 May 18:00<br>
**Murder by Numbers + The Hitchhiker: W.G.O.D**<br>
Thu 19 May 18:30<br>
**Dandelion Dead**<br>
Sat 21 May 13:10<br>
**New Tempo**<br>
Sun 29 May 11:50

Mike Hodges interviewed by The British Entertainment History Project:  
**https://historyproject.org.uk/interview/mike-hodges**<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTY2NDQ0MDkxOF19
-->
