---
layout: post
title: Rome, Open City
published: true
date: 2022-01-05
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'Italy 1946, 103 mins<br> Director: Roberto Rossellini'
pdf: '2022-01-05-rome-open-city.pdf'
---

_The screening on Wednesday 29 January will be introduced by lecturer and writer Dr Julia Wagner._

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Rossellini – ‘father of the French New Wave’ – was, according to Truffaut, an influence on his work; for three years he worked as an assistant to the Italian, who was the first person to read the script for _The 400 Blows_. This powerful drama, shot at the end of WWII, depicts the German Occupation, taking in the experiences of Resistance fighters, traitors, black marketeers and ordinary citizens.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

Between 1945 and 1947, Roberto Rossellini made three films chronicling the final throes of World War II and its devastating immediate aftermath: _Rome, Open City_ (1945), _Paisà_ (1946) and _Germany Year Zero_ (_Germania, anno zero_ 1948). It was Rossellini’s second war trilogy, coming after three pictures he made while Italy was still under fascist rule: _The White Ship_ (1941), _A Pilot Returns_ (1942) and _The Man with the Cross_ (1943).

_Rome, Open City_ was initially planned as a documentary on Don Giuseppe Morosini, a priest accused of resistance activity and executed by the Nazis, but as the project evolved, Rossellini and his collaborators (including Sergio Amidei and a young Federico Fellini) decided to broaden the film’s scope so that the story of the priest became one of several narrative strands. They drew on other harrowing stories of life and death under the German occupation, including that of Teresa Gullace, who was shot while going to the aid of her husband.

Although Rome had been liberated, shooting conditions in early 1945 were difficult. Electricity supplies were erratic and curfews were still in place. Rossellini had been given funds by a local countess, but these quickly ran out. To finish the film he sold whatever personal items he could and made do with discarded pieces of film stock, including material the Allies used to produce newsreels. Synchronised sound was also out of the question, so the film was shot silent with dialogue and sound effects added in post-production, together with Renzo Rossellini’s score.

Helping to keep the project afloat amid myriad difficulties were two established personalities of stage and screen. Aldo Fabrizi and Anna Magnani had already appeared together in two lighter, more comic portraits of Roman life: Mario Bonnard’s _Campo de’ fiori_ (1943) and Mario Mattoli’s _The Last Wagon_ (1943). Rossellini himself was quick to acknowledge the importance of these films in the development of neorealism, especially in their small-scale, regional storytelling and their use of dialect. Fabrizi and Magnani’s performances in _Rome, Open City_ have been seared into film history – for Magnani in particular, it was the role of a lifetime.<br>
**Pasquale Iannone, _Sight and Sound_, May 2013**

_Rome, Open City_ has such a daunting (and amply merited) reputation as the foundation stone of modern Italian cinema that it’s easy to forget how well it works as entertainment: if it weren’t for the fact that it was shot on the streets of war devastated Rome and cast with locals who’d recently lived through events reconstructed on screen, it could be marketed simply as a pacy resistance-vs-Gestapo thriller. And one shouldn’t downplay this aspect: it undoubtedly helped its considerable commercial success at a time when international interest in Italian cinema was effectively non-existent. Anna Magnani, too, was unknown abroad and considered a light comedienne at home, but she’s so forceful here that her mid-point death (one of 1940s cinema’s great shock moments) might have unbalanced a lesser film. Instead, the final act turns into a heartfelt, viscerally powerful paean to the courage of individual resistance activists (led by Aldo Fabrizi’s mulishly stubborn priest), unmatched in impact until Jean-Pierre Melville’s _Army of Shadows_ a quarter of a century later.

As with Satyajit Ray’s early work, there’s a pervasive assumption that the challenging circumstances of their production will always leave Rossellini’s mid-1940s films looking a bit ropey. Thanks to a gorgeous digital restoration by L’Immagine Ritrovata lab in Bologna, however, _Rome Open City_ rivals almost any other film of its decade, with only very occasional allowances needed for hastily grabbed out-of-focus shots or visibly differing film stocks.<br>
**Michael Brooke, _Sight and Sound_, May 2015**

Roberto Rossellini’s three war pictures are just as much history as it is cinema, and remain required viewing, for the sake of cultural literacy, not just cinephilia. Which was unquestionably Rossellini’s objective: no other major auteur has made fiction films so intent on communicating to and broadening the perspective of an unspecialised audience, minus the entertainment-complex bullshit (in this sense, the Senegalese Ousmane Sembene is his truest heir). The one director whose major work was truly born out of the fire of WWII, Rossellini was committed to ‘what happened’, and never trucked with manipulations, stereotypes or prettiness in the process.

Rossellini fell on hard times just as the Bergman-Fellini-Kurosawa art-film era peaked, with critics such as Pauline Kael shrugging and others hardly noticing at all. But film writers of all stripes in recent decades have come to pantheonise him, often without being capable of clarifying why – after all, his directing can be distracted (a reflection of his methods; co-writer/assistant director Fellini has remarked on how the set of _Paisan_ felt like a party), his visuals could be serviceable and his narratives sometimes seemed preachy. Truly, the circumstances under which _Rome, Open City_ was filmed – shot on piecemeal stock in locations where just two months before the participants in the production had suffered Nazi atrocities and worked in ‘la Resistenza’, and as the northern areas of the country were still fighting the Fascists – lent the film an authentic electricity it might not otherwise have had in such full supply.

But the grace of auteurism is to deflect questions of mere technique and effectiveness, and Rossellini’s achievement has dawned as one of in-the-moment historicisation and sympathetic temperance, an inquiring sensibility that has allowed David Thomson to describe _Paisan_ as ‘the truest Second World War movie’ and made Rossellini one of the key chroniclers of history in general. Spectacle and theatrical drama didn’t interest him; rather, the projection of the film-making’s reality was the ‘truth’ he sought to capture, in a way that paved the way for Godard and more acutely presaged the manner of Kiarostami. Thus, _Rome, Open City_, a fleet and breathless drama about a widow and a priest cornered into helping a Resistance leader, was a film ‘found’ in the ruins, so close to recent catastrophe that it seemed to be non-fiction. Indeed, it was ‘real’, ‘documenting’ its own attempts to show the world what Rossellini and his fellow Romans had seen, which would otherwise vanish into memory.<br>
**Michael Atkinson, _Sight and Sound_, March 2010**<br>

**ROME, OPEN CITY (ROMA CITTÀ APERTA)**<br>
_Director_: Roberto Rossellini  
_Production Company_: Excelsa Film  
_Production Company_: CIS-Nettunia *  
_Producers_: Chiara Politi, Peppino Amato, Aldo Venturini, Rod E. Geiger *  
_Assistant Producers_: Bruno Todini, Antonio Palumbo  
_Production Manager_: F. De Martino  
_Production Managers_: Carlo Civallero, Angelo Besozzi, Ermanno Donati, Luigi Carpentieri *  
_Production Secretary_: A. Manni  
_Assistant Director_: S. Amidei  
_Assistant Directors_: Angela Fellini, Mario Chiari, Alberto Manni, Bruno Todini *  
_Continuity_: J. Tuzzi  
_Screenplay/Dialogue_: Sergio Amidei  
_Screenplay/Dialogue in collaboration with_: Federico Fellini  
_From a story by_: Sergio Amidei  
_From a story by_: Alberto Consiglio \*  
_Director of Photography_: Ubaldo Arata  
_Camera Operator_: V. Seratrice  
_Camera:_ Gianni Di Venanzo, Carlo Carlini, Carlo Di Palma, Giuseppe Berta \*  
_Editor_: Eraldo Da Roma  
_Assistant Editor_: Jolanda Benvenuti \*  
_Sets_: R. Megna  
_Furnishings_: Mario Chiari \*  
_Make-up_: Alberto De Rossi \*  
_Torture Scenes Make-up_: Nino Franchina \*  
_Negatives/Positives_: Tecnostampa (Rome)  
_Tecnostampa Manager_: V. Genesi  
_Music_: Renzo Rossellini  
_Conductor_: L. Ricci  
_Sound_: R. Del Monte  
_Sound Recording_: Fono Roma  
_Sound System_: Western Electric  

**Cast**  
Aldo Fabrizi _(Don Pietro Pellegrini)_  
Anna Magnani _(Sora Pina)_  
V. [Vito] Annichiarico _(Marcello, Pina’s son)_  
N. [Nando] Bruno _(Agostino, aka Purgatorio, sacristan)_  
H. [Harry] Feist _(Major Bergmann)_  
F. [Francesco] Grandjacquet _(Francesco)_  
M. [Maria] Michi _(Marina Mari)_  
M. [Marcello] Pagliero _(Giorgio Manfredi, aka Luigi Ferraris)_  
E. [Eduardo] Passanelli _(policeman)_  
C. [Carlo] Sindici _(police commissioner)_  
A. [Akos] Tolnay _(Austrian deserter)_  
[Joop] Van Hulzen _(Major Hartmann)_  
Giovanna Galletti _(Ingrid)_ *  
Carla Rovere _(Lauretta, Pina’s sister)_ \*  
Amalia Pellegrini _(Manfredi’s landlady) \*_  
Alberto Tavazzi _(priest at execution) \*_  
Ferruccio De Martino _(soldier at execution) \*_  
Alberto Manni _(black marketer) \*_  
Lauro Gazzolo _(dubbed voice of Manfredi) \*_  
Giulio Panicali _(dubbed voice of Major Bergmann) \*_  
Gualtiero De Angelis _(dubbed voice of Francesco) \*_  
Roswitha Schmidt _(dubbed voice of Ingrid) \*_<br>

Italy 1946<br>
103 mins<br>

\* Uncredited<br>
<br>

**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**Rome, Open City (Roma, città aperta)**<br>
Wed 5 Jan 17:50, Wed 26 Jan 18:00 (+ intro by lecturer and writer Dr Julia Wagner), Sat 29 Jan 13:00<br>
**Letter from an Unknown Woman**<br>
Thu 6 Jan 20:40, Sat 15 Jan 15:40, Mon 31 Jan 20:45<br>
**Casque d’or**<br>
Fri 7 Jan 20:45, Wed 12 Jan 17:50 (+ pre-recorded intro by film critic and historian Pamela Hutchinson), Sun 23 Jan 13:10<br>
**Gentlemen Prefer Blondes**<br>
Sat 8 Jan 16:00, Thu 13 Jan 18:10, Mon 17 Jan 18:20<br>
**Ordet (The Word)**<br>
Sun 9 Jan 13:20, Tue 18 Jan 20:30<br>
**Smiles of a Summer Night**<br>
Sun 9 Jan 16:00, Thu 20 Jan 20:50, Tue 25 Jan 18:10<br>
**Bigger Than Life**<br>
Mon 10 Jan 14:30, Wed 19 Jan 18:05 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large), Wed 26 Jan 20:50<br>
**Citizen Kane**<br>
Tue 11 Jan 17:50, Thu 27 Jan 18:00<br>
**La Grande Illusion**<br>
Tue 11 Jan 18:15, Sun 16 Jan 12:40<br>
**Twelve Angry Men**<br>
Fri 14 Jan 14:40, Mon 24 Jan 18:20, Fri 28 Jan 18:20<br>
**Shadow of a Doubt**<br>
Sat 22 Jan 12:10, Tue 25 Jan 14:30<br>
**Les Enfants terribles**<br>
Sun 30 Jan 15:15<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  
<br>

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
