---
layout: post
title: Tempo
published: true
date: 2022-05-17
readtime: true
categories: ['RETURN OF THE OUTSIDER<br>THE FILMS OF MIKE HODGES']
tags: [Television]
metadata: 'UK 1966-67, 116 mins<br> Director: Mike Hodges'
pdf: '2022-05-17-tempo.pdf'
---

Hodges succeeded Kenneth Tynan as producer of _Tempo_, ITV’s arts programme.  He switched its largely studio-based output to 16mm film and launched three series: _Tempo Profiles_; _Tempo Entertainers_; _Tempo International_. Samples from each are included in this programme, which features Orson Welles, Jacques Tati and Ornette Coleman (_International_); Buskers (_Entertainers_); Harold Pinter and Jean-Luc Godard (_Profiles_) and more.  
**bfi.org.uk**

By the beginning of the 1960s, one television programme stood as the acme of arts programming – the BBC’s ‘flagship’ series _Monitor_. It was presided over by the avuncular Huw Wheldon, who conducted interviews in the studio and introduced films on artists and their worlds, all beautifully crafted in monochrome 35mm. Future film directors John Schlesinger and Ken Russell learnt their trade there and developed a personal voice.  How was the relative newcomer of independent television to compete? The answer came in the shape of _Tempo_, launched in October 1961 with flamboyant theatre critic Kenneth Tynan as editor and presenter. It ran for eight years, outliving _Monitor_, but today is less frequently cited as a force in the transmission of culture through the small screen. Yet the editor of _Arena_ Anthony Wall recalls the dynamic, fluid style and open-door policy of _Tempo_ as a key influence on that very individual BBC arts series.

As with _Monitor_, far less of the studio content of _Tempo_ survives than the specially crafted films. Just as Jonathan Miller brought about a controversial sea change in _Monitor_ when he took over in 1964, largely dropping Wheldon’s big-game-hunt of great artists for an  off-centre, handheld approach, so _Tempo_ underwent an aesthetic makeover when Mike Hodges, future director of _Get_ _Carter_ (1971), _Flash_ _Gordon_ (1980) and _Croupier_ (1998), arrived from Granada’s groundbreaking current-affairs series _World_ _in_ _Action_ to become series producer.

Already a new sensibility had crept into _Tempo_ with the employment of art-school graduates, notably Trevor Preston (later the writer of such compelling crime series as _Out_) and James (later the film director Jim) Goddard. Inspired by his experience working with the Maysles brothers in the US, Hodges abandoned the studio and commissioned half hour films to be shot on lightweight 16mm equipment. He found highly accomplished crews at a Canadian company established in London, Allan King Associates. As Hodges recalls, ‘The budget was only £2,000 for each programme. Out of that had to come the costs of shooting and the editing, but 16mm gave us much more access and freedom, even if we only had two days of actual filming.’

He then inaugurated _Tempo_ _Profile_, including a frank and direct interview with Harold Pinter (and featuring extracts from _The_ _Homecoming_ with its original cast), a sharp yet curiously evasive Duke Ellington, a wonderfully expansive Orson Welles (‘all shot in an architect friend’s flat below mine in Notting Hill’) and a strikingly intimate look at the contrasted worlds of ballet dancer Lynn Seymour and new pop sensation Tom Jones. This bold mix of what was then characterised as high and low art was a definite breakthrough. Next, Hodges devised a series he ‘laughingly’ called _Tempo_ _International_, with the majority of filming done in Paris. As Hodges explains: ‘I followed union rules and took a crew over there, camera and sound plus two assistants, and split them into two crews.’ There he covered most of his ‘international’ subjects, such as the charming portrait by director Dick Fontaine (another _World_ _in_ _Action_ graduate) of Jacques Tati at work on his magnum opus, _Playtime_.

For Hodges, the real gear change came in 1967 with _New_ _Tempo_. It was a last hurrah of highly experimental films, resulting in disgruntled viewers jamming the ITV switchboard; amazingly, the programme’s time slot by this stage was Sunday afternoon, just after lunch. ‘I was completely obsessed with Marshall McLuhan, it was such a freewheeling time, everything was breaking down, and you began to make extraordinary connections, which he was very adroit at doing.’ Theme-based films in a fast-cut essay format proved to be too much too soon.  
**David Thompson, _Sight & Sound_, April 2013**
<br><br>

**TEMPO**  
_Producer:_ Mike Hodges  
_Production Company:_ ABC Television  
ITV tx 1966/67  
Total running time: 116 mins<br>
<br>

**RETURN OF THE OUTSIDER:  THE FILMS OF MIKE HODGES**<br>
**The Terminal Man (director’s cut)**<br>
Mon 2 May 14:50; Mon 16 May 20:40<br>
**Mike Hodges in Conversation**<br>
Tue 3 May 18:15<br>
**Black Rainbow**<br>
Tue 3 May 20:40; Sun 22 May 18:10<br>
**Pulp**<br>
Wed 4 May 18:15; Wed 11 May 20:50<br>
**I’ll Sleep When I’m Dead**<br>
Thu 5 May 18:00; Mon 30 May 17:50<br>
**Morons from Outer Space**<br>
Fri 6 May 18:05; Wed 18 May 20:50 **+ World in Action: The Flipside**<br>
**Flash Gordon**<br>
Sat 7 May 12:00; Thu 19 May 20:20 **+ The Tyrant King: Episode 1: Scarface**<br>
**Squaring the Circle + World in Action:  Goldwater for President? or How to Win Friends and Influence People**<br>
Sun 8 May 11:50<br>
**A Prayer for the Dying**<br>
Sun 8 May 15:20; Sun 15 May 18:10<br>
**Tempo**<br>
Tue 17 May 18:00<br>
**Murder by Numbers + The Hitchhiker: W.G.O.D**<br>
Thu 19 May 18:30<br>
**Dandelion Dead**<br>
Sat 21 May 13:10<br>
**New Tempo**<br>
Sun 29 May 11:50

Mike Hodges interviewed by The British Entertainment History Project:  
**https://historyproject.org.uk/interview/mike-hodges**<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTAzMDU5MzQxOF19
-->
