---
layout: post
title: Ordet
published: true
date: 2022-03-30
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'Denmark 1955, 125 mins<br> Director: Carl Theodor Dreyer'
pdf: '2022-03-30-ordet.pdf'
---
Carl Theodor Dreyer’s austere yet magnificent adaptation of Kaj Munk’s play is an examination of the tensions and allegiances within a family, the former arising from differences in temperament and faith (one of them even deludedly believes he is Christ), the latter through love. Meticulously paced, serenely beautiful and miraculously moving, it was felt by Truffaut – among others – to possess ‘a formal perfection that touches the sublime’.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

The Danish playwright and Lutheran country priest, Kaj Munk (1898–1944), whose play _Ordet_ (1932) is the basis of Dreyer’s astonishing 1955 film, once declared that the aim and object of all true art is to produce a ‘shock in the soul’. Munk, a charismatic public figure, resisted the Nazi occupation of Denmark, urging defiance of the exorbitant demands of the State: ‘By our death we shall conquer. We must obey God before man.’ He was found in a ditch with three shots in the head near the German headquarters at Silkeborg on 5 January 1944. That is, he lived and died by the ‘word’ – the literal meaning of ‘ordet’ in Danish. Dreyer’s film, made a decade after its author’s shocking death, has a special place in many hearts because of the ‘shock’ it gives us. If you have not seen it you may wish to go through that extraordinary experience before you read on.

The film is set near Munk’s parish of Vedersø in the rural community of West Jutland, dominated by religious divisions between the life-affirming ‘Glad Christians’ of Grundtvigism and the dour puritanical devotees of the ‘Inner Mission’ (both are found wanting). _Ordet_’s theme is faith, its climax an apparent modern miracle – and the miracle of Dreyer’s direction, his delicate control of every element, is that the sensitive spectator who submits to the experience is drawn to will and accept, this transcendence of the common fate. How far this mysterious work is specifically Christian is, in fact, an intriguing question: Dreyer insisted in 1956 that ‘I have not rejected modern science for the miracle of religion’, but the ‘science’ he uses to account for what takes place is ‘recent psychic research’, which for him ‘in the simplest manner explained the seemingly inexplicable happenings of the play, and established a natural cohesion behind the supernatural occurrences that are found in the film.’ At any rate, Dreyer is as passionately committed to life and love here as he was in his masterly early comedy _The Parson’s Widow_ (1920).

In the course of his duties as a dramatic critic, Dreyer first saw Munk’s play ‘Legend of Today’, as _Ordet_ was subtitled, at the Betty Nansen Theatre in Copenhagen in 1932. He appears to have known he wanted to film it from that moment. In his 1933 essay on ‘The Real Talking Film’, he offered the cinematic possibilities of the play’s third act as an example of ‘a certain rhythm-bound restlessness’, reflected in the movements of actors and images: ‘If _The Word_ were to be filmed... the actors going to and from the sickroom would contribute to creating the two types of restlessness or excitement that condition the rhythm of the film to an essential degree.’ In the 21 years before he fulfilled his ambition to film _The Word_, Dreyer directed only two feature-length films, _Day of Wrath_ (1943) and the interesting but disowned _Two People_ (1945), yet his passion for cinema – ‘my only great passion’ he called it in 1950 – was unabated.

Dreyer’s adaptation of Munk is radical, and intriguing. He states in ‘The Cinematization of Ordet’ (1954) that plays work very differently from films. ‘Situations and remarks that are effective from the stage often turn out to be deadly dangerous on film. A revaluation and simplification must take place.’  Dreyer cuts great swathes out of Munk’s text, and writes whole new scenes as well as drastically shortening others and moving elements around. ‘The essential is all one needs’, he told a _Cahiers du cinéma_ interviewer in 1965.

Accordingly, the script is less structured like a ‘well-made play’ as in Munk’s original. And it is toned down. Dreyer’s pastor, doctor and Peter the tailor are not as satirically presented as they are by Munk, whose play offers a debate about miracles between characters who hold a wide range of views from the materialistic to the piously hypocritical. Munk also leaves the more conventional, secular ‘explanations’ of the story’s strange events open to discussion.

The play traces the madness of Johannes, in crudely Freudian terms, to the death of his fiancée, so that his return to sanity can follow from his reliving of that trauma, on seeing the dead Inger. Dreyer pointedly negates any love-plot. His pastor asks young Mikkel, ‘Was it love?’ – and is told with bitter sarcasm, ‘No, Kierkegaard.’ Most strikingly, given the film’s climax, Munk’s doctor complains of West Jutland’s ‘antiquated system’ of issuing non-medical death certificates. After the final ‘miracle’, his materialism unaffected, he simply declares, ‘These amateur death certificates must be done away with!’

Dreyer, in contrast, stripping away such explanations, digressions and exaggerations, creates a potent air of mystery around the main action. Whereas his _The Passion of Joan of Arc_  (1928), as he wrote in an essay called ‘Realised Mysticism’ (1929), was ‘a hymn to the triumph of the soul over life’, _Ordet_ might be seen as ‘a hymn to the triumph of the soul over death’. It is also a triumph of style. For Dreyer in ‘A Little on Film Style’ (1943), style and soul are inextricable: ‘The soul is shown through the style, which is the artist’s way of giving expression to his perception of the material.’ And superficially, the style of _Ordet_ is strikingly slow. It only has 114 shots, averaging 65 seconds each, and correspondingly took a mere five days to edit, whereas _Day of Wrath_ had 436, averaging 14.8 seconds, and took 12 (_Gertrud_ was to take three). Rhythm is crucial to its effect – or rather, the complex combination of rhythms: ‘The total rhythm of the film,’ he says in 1954, ‘is again an amalgamation of many different rhythms, from the gliding camera right to the way the lines are read.’

As the critic David Bordwell has shown, Dreyer’s constantly tracking camera, using the crab dolly (whose squeak is sometimes audible, due to direct sound), hypnotically follows the characters with an arc-and-pan movement, keeping a steady distance from them – saving the conventional, dramatic track in and the first close-ups till the climax. It traces an intricate, steady path to the overwhelming, mysterious climax. As Dreyer expert Donald Skoller says, ‘When Dreyer speaks of “a continuous, flowing, horizontally gliding movement”, he is not referring to camera movement alone. His remarks refer to the effect of the whole _mise-en-scene_, the total compositional materialisation of what is envisioned, as it occurs on screen.’ Dreyer declared in 1943, ‘We can often read a person’s whole character in a single expression, a wrinkling of the forehead or a blink of the eye,’ and ‘there is a certain accordance between a human being’s walk and speech.’

The cumulative effect is stunning. Eric Rohmer’s _Cahiers_ review in 1956 testifies to the spell Dreyer’s patiently-paced film weaves, to our deep engagement with the action: ‘At the end of the most breathless suspense that any film has even proposed, the awaited miracle, wished for by even the most Voltairean spectator, takes place.’ The tragic emotion has in fact, Rohmer continues, a classical dignity. ‘The quality of anguish that _Ordet_ makes us experience is certainly not in any way inferior to that which was created by Greek theatre.’ As Dreyer’s friend the critic Ebbe Neergaard wrote in 1955, ‘You have this feeling of a force behind the camera that compels you to the bitter end, into the hearts and minds of the characters.’

_Ordet_ is an ensemble piece: it is possible to read different characters as its centre or hero – old Borgen, young Mikkel and Inger all act as focal points. Most haunting of the candidates, perhaps, is the mad Johannes, whom François Truffaut described stimulatingly in 1969: ‘The film’s hero, Johannes, is a visionary who thinks he is Jesus Christ; but only when he comes to recognise his delusion does he ‘receive’ spiritual power.’ It reinforces _Ordet_’s strange challenge to us, when we realise that it is a sane Johannes who seems to be given ‘the word that can bring the dead alive’ – through the faith of a child. The power of the cinematic illusion here, if we accept it, makes us believe the unbelievable, if only temporarily: it unhooks the world from its moorings and sends it spinning into a new life.<br>
**Philip Horne, essay from BFI _The Carl Theodor Dreyer Collection_ (Blu-ray Box Set) booklet**<br>

**ORDET (THE WORD)**<br>
_Director:_ Carl Th. Dreyer<br>
_Production Company:_ Palladium (Copenhagen)<br>
_Producer:_ Erik Nielsen<br>
_Screenplay:_ Carl Th. Dreyer<br>
_Script Collaborators:_ Jesper Gottschalch, Karen Petersen<br>
_Based on the play_ Ordet _by:_ Kaj Munk<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Henning Bendtsen<br>
_Camera Operators:_ John Carlsen, Erik Wittrup Willumsen<br>
_Editor:_ Edith Schlüssel<br>
_Art Director:_ Erik Aaes<br>
_Costumes:_ N. Sandt Jensen<br>
_Music:_ Poul Schierbeck<br>
_Music Director:_ Emil Reesen<br>
_Sound:_ Knud Kristensen<br>
_Sound Assistants:_ Henning Møller, Kai Larsen<br>

**Cast**<br>
Henrik Malberg _(Morten Borgen)_<br>
Emil Hass Christensen _(Mikkel Borgen, Morten’s son)_<br>
Preben Lerdorff Rye _(Johannes Borgen, Morten’s son)_<br>
Cay Kristiansen _(Anders Borgen, Morten’s son)_<br>
Birgitte Federspiel _(Inger Borgen, Mikkel’s wife)_<br>
Ann Elisabeth _(Maren Borgen, Mikkel’s daughter)_<br>
Susanne _(Lilleinger, Mikkel’s daughter)_<br>
Ejner Federspiel _(Peter, the tailor)_<br>
Sylvia Eckhausen _(Kristine, Peter’s wife)_<br>
Gerda Nielsen _(Anne, Peter and Kristine’s daughter)_<br>
Henry Skjær _(the doctor)_<br>
Ove Rud _(the pastor)_<br>
Hanne Aagesen _(Karen, the servant)_<br>
Edith Thrane _(Mette Maren)_<br>
Kirsten Andreasen<br>

Denmark 1955<br>
125 mins<br>
<br>

**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**Léon Morin, prêtre (Léon Morin, Priest)**<br>
Mon 28 Mar 17:50; Thu 7 Apr 20:40;  Sun 24 Apr 12:00<br>
**Lourdes**<br>
Tue 29 Mar 20:50; Thu 7 Apr 18:10;  Wed 20 Apr 20:50<br>
**Ordet (The Word)**<br>
Wed 30 Mar 17:45 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large); Sun 10 Apr 15:30;  Fri 15 Apr 18:10; Sat 23 Apr 11:50<br>
**Black Narcissus**<br>
Thu 31 Mar 21:00; Tue 12 Apr 20:45;  Tue 19 Apr 18:10; Sat 30 Apr 15:00<br>
**Babette’s Feast (Babettes Gaestebud)**<br>
Fri 1 Apr 18:10; Sun 10 Apr 12:10;  Sat 16 Apr 12:20; Tue 26 Apr 20:50<br>
**Aguirre, Wrath of God (Aguirre, der Zorn Gottes)**<br>
Sat 2 Apr 20:40; Fri 8 Apr 18:15; Tue 19 Apr 20:50; Mon 25 Apr 18:10<br>
**The Seventh Seal (Det Sjunde Inseglet)**<br>
Sun 3 Apr 15:20; Mon 18 Apr 15:20;  Fri 22 Apr 20:50<br>
**The Miracle Woman**<br>
Mon 4 Apr 18:20; Fri 15 Apr 20:50;  Thu 28 Apr 18:10; Fri 29 Apr 18:10<br>
**Stalker**<br>
Tue 5 Apr 20:00; Sat 9 Apr 17:30;  Thu 21 Apr 20:00; Sat 23 Apr 20:00<br>
**My Night with Maud (Ma Nuit chez Maud)**<br>
Wed 6 Apr 18:10 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large); Thu 14 Apr 20:30;  Fri 22 Apr 17:50; Mon 25 Apr 20:45<br>
**Une Femme douce (A Gentle Creature)**<br>
Wed 6 Apr 21:00; Wed 13 Apr 18:20 (+ intro by independent filmmaker and critic Alex Barrett);  Mon 18 Apr 13:10<br>
**The New World**<br>
Sun 10 Apr 17:30; Sat 30 Apr 19:50<br>
**The Gospel According to Matthew  (Il vangelo secondo Matteo)**<br>
Mon 11 Apr 18:00; Sun 17 Apr 14:40<br>
**The Last Temptation of Christ**<br>
Fri 15 Apr 14:15; Sun 24 Apr 17:40<br>
**Sebastiane**<br>
Sat 16 Apr 14:50; Tue 19 Apr 20:30; Wed 27 Apr 17:45 (+ intro by BFI curator Simon McCallum)<br>
**I Confess**<br>
Sun 17 Apr 12:00; Wed 20 Apr 18:00 (+ intro tbc)<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  
<br>

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
