---
layout: post
title: The Ordeal
published: true
date: 2022-05-02
readtime: true
categories: ['CRUEL FLESH<br>FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY']
tags: [Horror]
metadata: 'Belgium-France-Luxembourg 2004, 92 mins<br> Director: Fabrice du Welz'
pdf: '2022-05-02-ordeal.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

When Marc (Laurent Lucas), a cabaret singer heading from one Christmas performance to another, breaks down in the woods, he’s left with little choice but to follow the strange man searching for his dog to a secluded inn run by one Bartel (Jackie Berroyer). Bartel warns him to stay away from the local village, but it’s quickly apparent that the villagers are the least of Marc’s problems. Knocked unconscious, stripped and dressed as the innkeeper’s long-gone wife, Marc’s ordeal reaches its peak in a brutal overhead tracking shot as the village men descend on the inn.

Director Fabrice du Welz works wonders with atmospheric textures, a dance sequence in the village bar playing like a psychotic outtake from Bela Tarr’s _Sátántangó_ (1994). That stalwart of French cinematic grimness, Philippe Nahon, shows up as leader of the village loons, but _Calvaire_’s trump card is undoubtedly Berroyer’s Bartel. Despite being so obviously unhinged, there’s something oddly touching in his joy at a first family Christmas in years – even if said family consists of another deranged yokel, a sodomised cow and a crying man dressed as his dead wife.  
**Matthew Thrift, bfi.org.uk**

In the wake of Gaspar Noé’s _Irreversible_ and Alexandre Aja’s _Switchblade Romance_ (not to mention Virginie Despentes and Coralie Trinh Thi’s _Baise-moi_) comes another gruelling European endurance test straddling the divide between American grind-house cinema and continental arthouse experimentation. Chillingly lensed by Benoît Debie (DoP on _Irreversible_ and Dario Argento’s _The Card Player_), and boasting another impressively worrying appearance by the monumental Philippe Nahon, _Calvaire_ is a stripped-down, surrealist (and borderline satirical) slasher yarn in which a naive young singer is stranded in a Grimm-ly darkened wood where he swiftly falls prey to monstrous desires. With an unsettling soundtrack which slips from easy-listening sentimentality to carnivalesque grotesquerie via a cacophony of animal grunts and inhuman groans, this is a claustrophobic mood piece notable for its pervasive sense of melancholic nastiness, a nastiness that is undercut only by its rankly knowing genre-literacy.

‘Obstinacy is the key to everything!’ announces insane innkeeper Bartel (Jackie Berroyer), whose grief at the loss of his spouse has robbed him of both his award-winning sense of humour and his grip upon reality. Offering Marc Stevens (the lurking Laurent Lucas) refuge in his run-down hotel, Bartel mistakes the fey singer for his errant wife and vows that he/she will never leave him again. Meanwhile, Bartel’s troubled companion Boris (Jean-Luc Couchard) – an inbred cousin of one of David Lynch’s woodland eccentrics – makes a similarly obsessive imaginative leap, stealing a cow he thinks is his lost dog, and thus bringing down the wrath of the bestial local villagers who are ‘not like you and me’. From the dreamy grey-green mistiness of the forests of Belgium’s Hautes Fagnes region, to the blood-red interiors of Bartel’s private hell, Fabrice du Welz’s gruelling feature debut lumbers engagingly between satire and sadism as it drags the audience through a catalogue of tortures (including gang and animal rape) designed to achieve a strange blend of the ‘aggressive  and poetic’.

The title _Calvaire_ invokes the martyrdom of Christ, signalled on screen by an enigmatic crucifixion in the film’s final reel. Fittingly, Marc’s symbolic role is to take upon himself the sins of the world into which he has stumbled, becoming a focal point for the unrequited desires of all those whom he encounters. In an early scene, an elderly woman to whom he has crooned seductively from the stage, mistakes his act for projected passion. Later, a cache of furtive Polaroids reveals the depths of another admirer’s longing. Yet it is only when Marc meets the doggedly obstinate Bartel that the preening star learns the true price of enduring love. The fact that Bartel’s nemesis turns out to be the physically similar Robert Orton (Nahon), a villager with whom the innkeeper’s late wife seems to have been intimately acquainted, adds a slyly soap-operatic twist to the proceedings, even as events veer ever further into the realms of screaming madness.

Lifting its narrative riffs from a string of well-recognised shockers (the male-rape anxieties of _Deliverance_; the twisted fandom of _Misery_, the siege mentality of _Straw Dogs_) and playfully nodding toward a string of cult-movie connections (the name Bartel references the writer-director-star of _Eating Raoul_); Jo Prestia, who played the rapist in _Irreversible_, appears as a farmer), _Calvaire_’s savage bite is constantly softened by its cinematic self-referentiality. One sequence, depicting a grisly Christmas celebration at which Marc/Gloria is an unwilling guest, exactly mimics the dinner-table scene from _The Texas Chain Saw Massacre_, right down to the gurning shots of howling rustics and extreme close-ups of victimised eyeballs. The most effective scene, in which the sinister villagers engage in an increasingly frenzied zombie dance, recalls the ending of _The Wicker Man_, in which the hero is gaily burned alive to the strains of ‘Summer Is A-Comen In’.

As a cleansing snow settles on _Calvaire_’s other-worldly finale, one is left with a dreamy sense of having been here several times before, often in more original circumstances. It’s derivative stuff, and unashamedly so. Yet the haunting tunes and vile images which litter this lovelorn journey have a deeper and more haunting resonance than its magpie surface may imply.  
**Mark Kermode, _Sight & Sound_, January 2006**
<br><br>

**THE ORDEAL (CALVAIRE)**  
_Director_: Fabrice du Welz  
_Production Companies_: The Film,  La [Parti] Production, Tarantula  
_In co-production with_: StudioCanal  
_With the support of_: Centre du Cinéma et de l’Audiovisuel de la Communauté française de Belgique  
_With the participation of_: Fonds National de Soutien á la Production, CinéCinéma  
_With the support of_: Bang!  
_Executive Producers_: Vincent Tavier,  Michaël Gentile, Eddy Géradon-Luyckx  
_Producers_: Vincent Tavier, Eddy Géradon-Luyckx  
_Associate Producers_: Philippe Kauffmann, Guillaume Malandrin, Donato Rotunno  
_Key Unit Production Manager_: Olivier Guedj  
_Unit Production Manager_: Louis Lechevalier  
_Unit Manager_: Laurent Macchietti  
_Production Manager_: Ludovic Douillet  
_Production Consultant_: Felix Sorger  
_1st Assistant Director_: Jean-Louis Frémont  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Sebastien Fernandes Tasch  
_Script Supervisor_: Laora Bardos-Feltoronyi  
_Screenplay_: Fabrice du Welz, Romain Protat  
_Director of Photography_: Benoît Debie  
_Camera Operator_: Benoît Debie  
_Gaffer_: Jim Howe  
_Stills Photography_: Luca Etter  
_Special Visual Effects_: AutreChose  
_Special Effects_: Alain Couty  
_Editor_: Sabine Hubeaux  
_Art Director_: Emmanuel Demeulemeester  
_Set Decorator_: Isabelle Girard  
_Storyboard Artist_: Didier Kinsella  
_Properties_: Laurent Coutellier  
_Construction Manager_: Bertrand Renault  
_Costumes_: Géraldine Picron  
_Key Make-up_: Aurélie Elich  
_Titles_: Monsieur & Madame  
_Colour Timer_: Dirk Vandewalle  
_Music_: Vincent Cahay  
_Choreography_: Savéria Thomasi  
_Sound Recording_: Marc Engels  
_Additional Sound_: Fred Meert  
_Sound Re-recording_: Benoît Biral,  Manu de Boissieux  
_Sound Editor_: Fred Meert  
_Sound Effects_: Bertrand Boudaud, Benoît Biral, Manu de Boissieux  
_Animal Handler_: Pascal Jacqmin

**Cast**  
Laurent Lucas _(Marc Stevens)_  
Jackie Berroyer _(Paul Bartel)_  
Philippe Nahon _(Robert Orton)_  
Jean-Luc Couchard _(Boris)_  
Brigitte Lahaie _(Mademoiselle Vicky)_  
Gigi Coursigny _(Madame Langhoff)_  
Philippe Grand’henry _(Tomas Orton)_  
Jo Prestia _(Farmer Mylène)_  
Marc Lefebvre _(Lucien)_  
Alfred David-Pingouin _(Roland)_  
Alain Delaunois _(giant)_  
Vincent Cahay _(Stan the pianist)_  
Johan Meys-Rosto _(Rosto)_  
Pierre Van Braekel, Romain Protat, Damien Waselle, Viktor Mikol, Nedzad Kurtagic, Yves Vaucher _(bar extras)_  
Borhan du Welz, Maxime Dewitte, Alexis Dewitte, Liam Gilson, Raphaël Schmidt, Eliot Cahay, Farkhad Alekperov _(children in wood)_

Belgium-France-Luxembourg 2004  
92 mins<br>
<br>

**CRUEL FLESH: FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY**<br>
**Carne + La Bouche de Jean-Pierre**<br>
Sun 1 May 11:50; Thu 12 May 20:45 (+ Q&A with Lucile Hadžihalilovic)<br>
**Baise-moi**<br>
Sun 1 May 18:20; Sat 7 May 20:50<br>
**The Ordeal (Calvaire)**<br>
Mon 2 May 12:30; Sun 22 May 18:20<br>
**Man Bites Dog (C’est arrivé près de chez vous)**<br>
Mon 2 May 15:10; Tue 10 May 20:55<br>
**Sex and Death, but Make It Arthouse**<br>
Tue 3 May 18:10<br>
**Trouble Every Day**<br>
Tue 3 May 20:30 (+ intro by writer and creative Sophie Monks Kaufman); Tue 24 May 20:45<br>
**Criminal Lovers (Les Amants criminels)**<br>
Wed 4 May 20:50; Sat 14 May 12:00<br>
**Pola X**<br>
Thu 5 May 20:25; Sat 28 May 17:50<br>
**Romance (Romance X)**<br>
Fri 6 May 18:00 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Tue 17 May 20:45<br>
**Philosophical Screens: Romance**<br>
Fri 6 May 20:00<br>
**In My Skin (Dans ma peau)**<br>
Sat 7 May 17:50 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Thu 19 May 20:40<br>
**High Tension (aka Switchblade Romance)  (Haute Tension)**<br>
Mon 9 May 18:00 (+ pre-recorded intro by author Alexandra West); Sat 28 May 12:20<br>
**Inside (À l’intérieur)**<br>
Sat 14 May 20:50; Thu 26 May 18:20<br>
**Them (Ils)**<br>
Mon 16 May 20:50; Sun 29 May 18:20<br>
**Irreversible** **(Irréversible)** (theatrical version)<br>
Sat 21 May 17:45<br>
**Martyrs**<br>
Sat 28 May 20:50; Tue 31 May 20:40<br>
**Horror à la Française**<br>
Free to view on the BFI YouTube channel from  11-31 May<br>
**BFI Courses: City Lit at the BFI:  New French Extremity**<br>
Every Tue from 10-31 May 18:30-20:30<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNjYyOTQzNDExXX0=
-->
