---
layout: post
title: Hostile
published: true
date: 2022-03-15
readtime: true
categories: ['THE CAMERA IS OURS<br>BRITAIN’S WOMEN DOCUMENTARY MAKERS']
tags: [Documentary]
metadata: 'UK 2021, 97 mins<br> Director: Sonita Gale'
pdf: '2022-03-15-hostile.pdf'
---

_+ director Sonita Gale in conversation with musician and Executive Producer Nitin Sawhney_

_Hostile_ is first-time filmmaker Sonita Gale’s exploration of the ‘hostile environment’ policy, offering a humanising portrayal of those caught in an utterly dehumanising system. The policy, which has expanded over the last decade, has seen the increased criminalisation and marginalisation of undocumented migrants, with a focus on making their lives as difficult as possible through reduced access to basic services and heavier policing.

While focusing on a contemporary UK policy, _Hostile_ pans out historically and geographically, weaving together present-day stories with those of colonialism and the postwar period, and experiences spanning the Commonwealth.  The result is one of the most comprehensive accounts of how we arrived at our current immigration system and legislation, meriting the film a place not just in cinemas across the country but in classrooms and courts of justice alike.

Gale’s subjects are her peers: working-class migrants and their children who settled across Britain in the postwar era. She explains: ‘I grew up in a Black and brown community in Wolverhampton. My parents arrived here from India, after partition and during the postwar wave of migration. It was a time of great social change, and in a way Black and Asian communities were at the forefront of this.’ _Hostile_ hones in on this social change in the context of an increasingly intolerant political landscape.

Introduced by the Conservative government in 2012, the hostile environment policy has gone on to provoke the Windrush scandal and mistreatment of human trafficking victims, most recently manifesting itself in the Nationality and Borders Bill, which has come under direct fire from the UNHCR, the UN’s refugee agency. Yet the rife xenophobia detailed throughout the film, and in many instances ratified by law, emanates from all sides, and _Hostile_ evades placing blame exclusively on the ruling party, also detailing Labour’s complicity. Gale notes, for example, ‘the 1968 Commonwealth Immigrants Act was pushed through by Labour home secretary James Callaghan. It subjected all holders of UK passports to immigration controls unless they, their parents or a grandparent had been born, adopted or naturalised in the United Kingdom.’

Gale points out that this law coincided with the expulsion of Uganda’s sizable South Asian population at the order of dictator Idi Amin. This South Asian presence in east Africa feeds into the personal background of Daksha, one of the individuals the documentary follows, who lovingly masterminds a voluntary kitchen to provide upwards of 2,000 meals on a daily basis to people lacking guaranteed access to food. But it also embodies the intersecting experiences of Black and Asian communities that animate the film, which engages a host of such voices from Brixton to the Midlands.

‘Growing up in the 1970s, I remember a lot of good spirit between the two communities,’ says Gale, while noting the differences in media portrayals of the two groups. She talks of her frustration at the media’s neglect of the political organising initiated by South Asian migrants and their children throughout history, often in collaboration with Black communities, such as Bradford’s United Black Youth League. She’s hoping to centre her next film on these complex and under-explored encounters, which span the Caribbean, east Africa, the Indian Ocean, as well as urban hubs of postcolonial migration like her native Wolverhampton.

These encounters between cultures are reflected in the documentary’s musical direction. The film’s executive producer is musician Nitin Sawhney, who has a committed track record of supporting human rights both within and beyond his musical output. Gale remembers the impact of hearing Sawhney’s seminal 1999 album _Beyond Skin_ and its track ‘Immigrant’, which uses audio from his father coming to the UK. ‘His perception of the country really stuck with me. It was wonderful to document the migrant experience in another format such as music.’ In 2021, Sawhney released the album _Immigrants_, which spurred Gale to interview him. ‘Our conversations continued, and I asked if he wanted to be an executive producer.’

Also on the soundtrack are British-Jamaican musician, composer and cellist Ayanna Witter-Johnson, and award-winning British-Ugandan George the Poet. As music and poetry are perhaps the most prominent means of diasporic self-expression, they are key in Gale’s desire to ‘change the narrative around how we speak about migrants’.

Depicting political and economic orders with an ever-expanding appetite to exclude – first migrants, then their children, soon the white working class – _Hostile_ reaches the dystopian conclusion that all humans risk being entirely reduced to their value and productivity through a capitalist lens. It’s a bleak verdict, but one offset by the fact that the film’s very existence and timely release have the potential to provoke change. ‘Films connect different communities, organisations and demographics, and I have seen that during the making and release of _Hostile_,’ says Gale. She’s keen to maximise the reach of her film, acknowledging ‘there is a current market for more immersive and inclusive experiences within film, with the pandemic demonstrating how we can open our doors to audience participation from all over the world.’

She’s actively engaged in off-screen action, creating an accompanying campaign which is ‘all about bringing awareness of the issues in the film, and seeking solutions to them.’ Her hope is that _Hostile_ can have an impact not only in the cultural sphere but in political and legislative ones too. ‘Our endgame is a screening in parliament and the UN, with the hope of bringing about actual policy change.’  
**Abiba Coulibaly, bfi.org.uk, 4 March 2022**
<br><br>

**HOSTILE**  
_Directed by_: Sonita Gale  
©: Gale Force Films Limited  
_A_ Galeforce Films _production_  
_Executive Producers_: Charlotte Fisher,  Nitin Sawhney CBE  
_Produced by_: Sonita Gale  
_Associate Producer_: Raghav Pasricha  
_Production Manager_: Eleanor Scott  
_Written by_: Sonita Gale  
_Script Editor:_ Heather Walsh  
_Development Researcher:_ Jess Gell  
_Researchers:_ Freya Pratty-Williams, James Holmes, Olivia Grace Hird, Olivia Smith, Liam Curran,  Robert Eades  
_Archive Researcher:_ Leonie Rousham  
_Director of Photography:_ Neil Harvey  
_Additional Cinematography:_ Ian Salvage,  Joseph Hallgate, Patrick Smith, Walter Finch  
_Editor_: Alex Fry  
_Music_: Nitin Sawhney CBE  
_Additional Music by_: Ayanna Witter-Johnson  
_Spoken Word:_ George the Poet  
_Sound Recordists:_ Alan Hill, Andrew Hoare, Andrew Yarme, Andy Paddon, Christopher Travers, Freddie Claire, Ian Maclagan, James Thomson, Louis Innis, Max Berridge, Olly Jennings, Phil Bax, Seb Blach, Stephen Anderson, Thomas Hart-George  
_Re-recording Mixer:_ Nigel Squibbs

**Featuring**<br>
Akram Salhab<br>
Anthony Bryan<br>
Brad Evans<br>
Daksha Varsani<br>
Dave Carr<br>
Elyas Ismail<br>
Farrukh Sair<br>
Gargi Bhattacharyya<br>
Janet McKay-Williams<br>
Jeevun Sandher<br>
Maya Goodfellow<br>
Michael Bankole<br>
Nitin Sawhney CBE<br>
Paresh Jethwa<br>
Patrick Vernon OBE<br>
Saba Sair<br>
Councillor Sonia Winifred<br>
Stephen Timms MP<br>
Zarah Sultana MP<br>
Zana Khan<br>

UK 2021©<br>
97 mins

**www.hostiledocumentary.com**
<br><br>

**THE CAMERA IS OURS: BRITAIN’S WOMEN DOCUMENTARY MAKERS**<br>
**From Beside the Seaside to the English Inn: Restoration Programme 1 + intro  by BFI curator Ros Cranston**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 18:15<br>
**For Sama + intro by director Waad  Al-Kateab + Children of the Ruins**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 20:30<br>
**The Camera Is Ours: Study Day + Independent Miss Craigie + Q&A with director Lizzie Thynne and producer Hollie Price**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 12:00-17:00<br>
**From the Sea to the Land Beyond**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 18:15<br>
**Seniors Free Archive Matinee:  White Riot + discussion**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 14:00<br>
**Cow**<br>
Tue 8 Mar 20:40<br>
**The Hermit of Treig + Q&A with  director Lizzie MacKenzie**<br>
Fri 11 Mar 18:10<br>
**From Birth-Day to Something Nice to Eat: Restoration Programme 2 + intro by  BFI curator Ros Cranston**<br>
Mon 14 Mar 18:15<br>
**Hostile + director Sonita Gale in conversation with Nitin Sawhney**<br>
Tue 15 Mar 18:00<br>

**The Camera Is Ours: Britain’s Women Documentary Makers** (two-disc DVD) is  released in March

A collection of shorts and features will soon be available on BFI Player

**MEZZANINE GALLERY**<br>
**Jill Craigie: Film Pioneer**<br>
In the 1940s Jill Craigie tackled subjects new to cinema in a unique blend of documentary, drama and, frequently, humour. One of the most photographed directors of her time, she was dubbed ‘Britain’s first woman filmmaker’ by the press, while she herself championed community voices and performers. This exhibition draws on a variety of sources, including works by leading photographers Lee Miller and Fred Daniels, to explore what made Craigie and her working methods unique.<br>
From Thu 3 Mar<br>
Guest curator: Lizzie Thynne<br>
Supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council and The University of Sussex<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE1MjI4ODU3MDRdfQ==
-->
