---
layout: post
title: Creed
published: true
date: 2022-10-22
readtime: true
categories: ['CLOSE-UP - RYAN COOGLER']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USA 2015, 133 mins<br> Director: Ryan Coogler'
pdf: '2022-10-22-creed.pdf'
---

Coogler revitalised the Rocky franchise with his second collaboration with lead actor Michael B Jordan. It’s nothing short of exhilarating, with fluid and immersive fight scenes, as well as a surprisingly emotional arc for Sylvester Stallone’s Balboa. With a third _Creed_ film due in cinemas later this year (directed by Jordan), there’s no better time to revisit this origin story.  
**bfi.org.uk**

There are several things that demonstrate the deftness with which director Ryan Coogler handles even the hoariest tropes of Sylvester Stallone’s _Rocky_ franchise, but the most prominent is his approach to Bill Conti’s iconic theme song, a marriage of orchestral pomp and brass-driven disco that topped the Billboard Hot 100 at around the same time that Stallone’s underdog boxing saga staged its own upset victory at the 1977 Academy Awards. Though reworked versions of Conti’s theme appear in the five sequels (four of them directed by Stallone) over the next three decades, it receives a more playful overhaul in _Creed_, Coogler’s surprisingly thoughtful and stylish reboot-slash-generational-torch-passing. Along with its inevitable use as a sample in a hip-hop track, trace elements recur throughout Ludwig Göransson’s score, which is unusually restrained for a movie that otherwise strives to hit all the beats required of a Hollywood sports drama.

Indeed, Conti’s blustery fanfare doesn’t arrive in full force until Adonis Johnson (Michael B. Jordan) approaches the ring for the climactic fight wearing a pair of stars-and-stripes shorts, just like his dad Apollo Creed (Carl Weathers) in _Rocky I_ (1976), _II_ (1979), _III_ (1982) and _IV_ (1985). It reappears one last time in a quieter, jazzier incarnation as Adonis and Rocky make their inevitable journey up the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art. By this time, Coogler has had many more opportunities to impress, having revitalised a seemingly decrepit movie property and elicited a little grace from the old Expendable himself, who gives a much richer performance as the elderly Rocky than he did in _Rocky Balboa_ (2006), his own stab at a franchise coda and potential restart.

Even viewers who have less patience with boxing-pic clichés must concede that Coogler – as the maker of a well-regarded American indie who’s been enlisted to perform artistic CPR on a dubious studio project – has survived a scenario that has tripped up many other young directors. He again gets strong assistance from Jordan, his lead in _Fruitvale Station_ (2013), a Sundance prizewinner that followed the final hours of a young Californian before his death at the hands of a transit cop. While Jordan plausibly channels the braggadocio that was Weathers’s forte, his Adonis is far more nuanced than Apollo ever was, which is not so hard, since the latter was essentially a cartoon version of Muhammad Ali minus Islam and politics. For one thing, Adonis is unabashedly sensitive, getting teary several times and successfully wooing his boho neighbour without resorting to smooth talk.

The fact that Adonis remains a convincingly formidable fighter who values personal fortitude over false fronts of street cred makes the character the very model of manhood for the age of Drake. Parallels between Coogler’s hero and the ubiquitous Canadian rapper also extend to tricky matters of class and privilege. As a product of foster homes as well as the Creed family fortune, Adonis doesn’t share the straightforward started-from-the-bottom narrative arc that’s typical of underdog sports-drama heroes. (Drake has faced the same issue, having grown up in an upper-class neighbourhood in Toronto and entered showbiz as an actor on a teen TV show.) In some respects, he’s an alien on the rough streets of north Philly, where Rocky sends him to train.  It’s a testament to Coogler’s faith in the strength of Adonis’s central crisis – in which he must grapple with the legacy of the father he never met and prove he deserves the famous surname – that he doesn’t contrive a real threat to his economic status. Evidently, failure for this hero means a retreat to mom’s mansion.

Another smart update is the decision by Coogler and his DP Maryse Alberti to eschew a high-speed cutting style in favour of Alfonso Cuarón-style long travelling shots, used to exhilarating effect in the first fight scene. Elsewhere, they make a big slo-mo moment seem bigger by having Adonis run alongside members of an urban dirt-bike gang of the kind seen tearing up Baltimore in Lofty Nathan’s documentary _12 O’Clock Boys_ (2013).

_Creed_ is less fleet-footed in other respects, occasionally becoming bogged down by the preponderance of training montages and the initially tender but ultimately perfunctory romantic storyline. But to anyone who prefers the crowdpleasing bravura of _Rocky II_ and _III_ over the unpalatable mix of faux grit and uncut schmaltz in all the other instalments (including the overrated original), Coogler’s effort punches far above its weight.  
**Jason Anderson, _Sight & Sound_, February 2016**
<br><br>

**CREED**  
_Director_: Ryan Coogler  
©: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures Inc,  Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.  
_A_ Chartoff Winkler _production_  
_This project was made possible with the support of_: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,  The Pennsylvania Film Office  
_This project was completed with assistance from the_: Music & Digital Entertainment Office Georgia Film, a division of the Georgia Department of Economic Development  
_This production participated in the_: New York State Governor’s Office for Motion Picture & Television Development’s Post Production Credit Program  
_Presented by_: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures Inc, Warner Bros. Pictures  
_In association with_: New Line Cinema  
_Executive Producer_: Nicolas Stern  
_Produced by_: Irwin Winkler, Robert Chartoff, Charles Winkler, Billy Chartoff, David Winkler,  Kevin King-Templeton, Sylvester Stallone  
_Unit Production Manager_: Barbara Kelly  
_Production Accountant_: Kevin Landry  
_Location Manager_: Patricia Taggart  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Nathalie Samanon  
_1st Assistant Director_: Donald L. Sparks  
_Script Supervisor_: Robb Foglia  
_Casting by_: Francine Maisler,  Kathleen Driscoll-Mohler  
_Screenplay by_: Ryan Coogler, Aaron Covington  
_Story by_: Ryan Coogler  
_Based on characters created by_: Sylvester Stallone  
_Director of Photography_: Maryse Alberti  
_A Camera Operator_: Benjamin Semanoff  
_Steadicam Operator_: Benjamin Semanoff  
_Stills Photographer_: Barry Wetcher  
_Visual Effects Supervisors_: John P. Nugent,  Alison O’Brien  
_Visual Effects by_: Sandbox FX Inc., BigHug FX Inc., East Side Effects Inc.  
_Special Effects Co-ordinator_: Patrick Edward White  
_Editors_: Michael P. Shawver, Claudia Castello  
_Production Designer_: Hannah Beachler  
_Art Director_: Jesse Rosenthal  
_Costume Designers_: Emma Potter,  Antoinette Messam  
_Department Head Make-up_: Corey Castellano  
_Department Head Hair_: Rita Parillo  
_Title Designer_: Richie Adams  
_Main and End Titles_: River Road Creative  
_End Crawl_: Scarlet Letters  
_Original Score and Songs_: Ludwig Göransson  
_Orchestra Conducted by_: Pete Anthony  
_Orchestrations by_: Jeff Atmajian, Henri Wilkinson, Erik Arvinder, Per Gunnar Juliusson  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Damian Canelos  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Steve Boeddeker,  Brandon Proctor  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Benjamin A. Burtt  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Clayton Barber  
_Boxing Consultants_: Jack Reiss, Greg Sirb,  Bob Bennett  
_Unit Publicist_: Frances Fiore

**Cast**  
Michael B. Jordan _(Adonis Johnson Creed)_  
Sylvester Stallone _(Robert ‘Rocky’ Balboa)_  
Tessa Thompson _(Bianca)_  
Phylicia Rashad _(Mary Anne Creed)_  
Anthony Bellew _(‘Pretty’ Ricky Conlan)_  
Graham McTavish _(Tommy Holiday)_  
Andre Ward _(Danny Wheeler, ‘Stuntman’)_  
Ritchie Costner _(Pete Sporino)_  
Jacob ‘Stitch’ Duran _(Stitch)_  
Malik Bazille _(Amir)_  
Ricardo ‘Padman’ McGill _(Padman)_  
Gabriel Rosado _(Leo Sporino, ‘The Lion’)_

USA 2015  
133 mins

**CLOSE-UP: RYAN COOGLER**<br>
**Fruitvale Station**<br>
Sat 22 Oct 12:30; Sat 29 Oct 16:15;  Mon 14 Nov 20:50<br>
**Creed**<br>
Sat 22 Oct 20:25; Sun 13 Nov 18:00<br>
**Black Panther**<br>
Sun 6 Nov 18:10; Sat 12 Nov 20:20<br>
**Black Panther: Wakanda Forever**<br>
Opens Fri 11 Nov BFI IMAX<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTU5NTUxNzk5Ml19
-->
