---
layout: post
title: Comedy
published: true
date: 2022-09-06
readtime: true
categories: ['CHANNEL 4<br>40 YEARS OF REVOLUTION']
tags: [Television, Talks]
metadata: 
pdf: '2022-09-06-c4-comedy.pdf'
---

**Panellists: Channel 4 Head of Comedy Commissioning Charlie Perkins; Trix Worrell (writer, _Desmond’s_); Original Senior Commissioning Editor Comedy and Entertainment, Mike Bolland; Peter Richardson (writer, director, actor _The Comic Strip_); Bridget Christie (comedian, writer, actor).**

Involving creatives and cast from some of Channel 4’s most loved comedies, together with the present Channel 4 Comedy Commissioning team, we celebrate the huge success of such memorable shows aired during the channel’s first 10 years, including _The Comic Strip Presents…_, _Drop the Dead_ _Donkey_, _Saturday Live_ and _Desmonds_. This skill in discovering new writing, directing and on-screen talent has continued with Channel 4’s current comedy slate, including the immense popularity of shows like _Derry_ _Girls_, _Stath_ _Lets_ _Flats_ and _We Are Lady Parts_.

**Channel 4 Comedy**  
Though covering a wide range of programming (from one-offs to series, sketch shows to sitcoms, new talent to big names, experimentation to ratings winners and marketable brands), Channel 4’s comedy output has altered the broadcasting landscape, while at its inventive, provocative or controversial best, comedy has in turn helped to define the channel’s identity.

Associations with ‘alternative’ comedy began with the opening night’s screening of ‘Five Go Mad in Dorset’ (1982). This was the first production from _The Comic Strip Presents..._ (C4/BBC2, 1982-2005), a strand of self-contained films from ‘alternative’ figures including Adrian Edmondson, Rik Mayall, Peter Richardson, Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders. The BBC debuted Strip regulars on _Boom Boom... Out Go the Lights_ (BBC, 1980-81) and initiated  _The Young Ones_ (BBC, 1982-84), but were hastened by the Strip. Widely variant in genre and style, _The Comic Strip Presents_’ classics included  ‘The Strike’ (1988), the satirical tale of Hollywood appropriating British history, and ‘Mr Jolly Lives Next Door’ (1988), a relentlessly violent, grubby distillation of the Mayall/Edmondson double-act.

Another high-profile ‘alternative’ platform was _Saturday Live/Friday Night Live_ (1985-88). Stand-up, character monologues and sketches combined to break stars including Jo Brand, Julian Clary, Ben Elton, Harry Enfield, Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie. New talent emerged in _The Last Resort with Jonathan Ross_ (1987-90) and _Saturday Zoo_ (1993), not least host Ross, while less-remembered platforms included Anglo-American sketch show _Assaulted Nuts_ (1985), stand-up vehicle _The Entertainers_ (1983), and _Packet of Three/Packing Them In_ (1991-92) featuring Frank Skinner. _Who Dares Wins_ (1983-88) was a vital late-night sketch show from a team including Rory McGrath, Jimmy Mulville and Tony Robinson. Combining topicality with provocative breaches of taste, the series was censured by the channel after an advert parody of Christ on the cross accepting a certain brand of cigar. Controversy has followed many major Channel 4 comedies.

However, the channel has never just been an ‘alternative’ platform. Older comics appeared alongside newer ones, from Frankie Howerd on _Saturday Live_ to Spike Milligan on _The Last Laugh Before TV-am_ (1985). Mainstream sitcoms included _Relative Strangers_ (1984-85), _Father’s Day_ (1983-84) and the escalating chaos of _Chance in a Million_ (1984-86). ‘Traditional’ sitcom still broke ground: the women’s refuge experiences woven into _The Refuge_ (1987-88), or the mainstream multiculturalism of _No Problem!_ (1983-85), _Tandoori Nights_ (1985-87) and the vibrant _Desmond’s_ (1988-94).

Overseas comedy played a vital role. American comedians including Emo Phillips, Rita Rudner and Steven Wright illuminated _Saturday Live_; Channel 4 filmed Bill Hicks and commissioned homegrown series such as _The Unpleasant World of Penn and Teller_ (1994). Bought-in comedies in the channel’s early days included the controversial broadcast of the 1979 _Richard Pryor Live in Concert_ (1983) and, less fashionably but successfully, Australian archival imports such as _The Paul Hogan Show_ (1973-82) and _The Norman Gunston Show_ (1975-79) whose inept (in-character) interviews with major figures pre-empt Ali G and Borat. Hugely successful imported sitcoms included _Cheers_ (US, 1982-93), _Frasier_ (US, 1993-2004), _The Golden Girls_ (US, 1985-92),  _The Cosby Show_ (US, 1984-92) and _Roseanne_ (US, 1988-97). More conventional offerings such as _Friends_ (US, 1994-2004) and _Will and Grace_ (US, 1998-2006) were balanced by the less mainstream _Dream On_ (US, 1990-96) and _South Park_ (US, 1997-), and the cost of acquiring _The Simpsons_ (US, 1989-) demonstrated the importance of big imports.

Homegrown and overseas talent united in _Whose Line Is It Anyway?_ (1988-98), which reflected the growth of improvisational comedy and spawned an American version. A channel-defining hit brand, elements of its format were  re-used by creators Dan Patterson and Mark Leveson in _Mock the Week_ (BBC, 2005-). The makers of _Whose Line..._, Hat Trick (set up by _Who Dares Wins_ cast members Jimmy Mulville and Rory McGrath with Denise O’Donoghue) showed the impact of Channel 4’s ‘publisher’ remit, becoming a major independent production company. Their output included Roman Britain-set sitcom _Chelmsford 123_ (1988-90), inventive sketch show _Paul Merton – The Series_ (1991-93), journalism parody _This Is David Lander/This Is David Harper_ (1988-90) and the hit newsroom sitcom _Drop the Dead Donkey_ (1990-98). Idiosyncratic classics from the turn of the 1990s included _Absolutely_ (1989-93), _Vic Reeves’ Big Night Out_ (1990-91) and Paul Makin’s undervalued _Nightingales_ (1990-93).

Channel 4’s restatement of its remit in 2007 included renewed investment in comedy. This reflects the degree to which its comedy output helps the channel to deliver the combination of experimentation, subversion and commercial success that are signposted by its difficult remit and critical reputation.  
**Dave Rolinson, BFI Screenonline, screenonline.org.uk**

**Five Go Mad in Dorset**  
Transmitted on the channel’s opening night, here was an immediate calling card that shouted comedy will be different on Channel 4. Eschewing any legacy from the standard TV situation comedy, it brought a new sense of irony in a lovingly crafted film that aligned Channel 4 firmly with the emerging Alternative Comedy scene, in a splendid send up of Enid Blyton’s  _Famous Five_ stories.
<br><br>

**THE COMIC STRIP PRESENTS…**  
**FIVE GO MAD IN DORSET**  
_Director_: Bob Spiers  
_Production Company_: Filmworks  
_For_: Channel Four  
_Producers:_ Michael Hall, Victoria Poushkine-Relf, Peter Richardson, Michael White  
_Written by_: Peter Richardson, Pete Richens  
_Photographed by:_ Peter Middleton  
_Editor:_ Peter Delfgou  
_Art Director:_ Adrian Smith  
_Make-up:_ Sheila Davy  

**Cast**  
Adrian Edmondson _(Dick)_  
Dawn French _(George)_  
Peter Richardson _(Julian)_  
Sandra Dorne _(Aunt Fanny)_  
Jennifer Saunders _(Anne)_  
Raymond Francis _(police inspector)_  
Robbie Coltrane _(gypsy/shopkeeper)_  
Ronald Allen _(Uncle Quentin)_  
Daniel Peacock _(Toby Thurlow)_  
Nosher Powell _(Fingers)_  
Ron Tarr _(Dirty Dick)_

C4 tx 2.11.1982  
30 mins<br>
<br>

**CHANNEL 4  
40 YEARS OF REVOLUTION**<br>
**Music & Youth: The Tube + Discussion & Q&A**<br>
Fri 2 Sep 18:20<br>
**Comedy: Discussion & Q&A + The Comic Strip Presents: Five Go Mad in Dorset**<br>
Tue 6 Sep 18:15<br>
**Channel 4’s TV Drama Revolution:  Discussion + Q&A**<br>
Sun 11 Sep 14:15<br>
**A Very British Coup + intro by  author Chris Mullin**<br>
Sun 11 Sep 16:30<br>
**Diversity: Handsworth Songs + Q&A with  John Akomfrah + Panel Discussion & Q&A**<br>
Mon 12 Sep 18:15<br>
**Out and Proud: Veronica 4 Rose  + Out on Tuesday + intro by original  
Channel 4 Commissioner Caroline Spry**<br>
Thu 15 Sep 18:15<br>
**Access / Direct Speech: The Work They Say  Is Mine + Women of the Rhondda  + Face of Our Fear**<br>
Tue 20 Sep 18:15<br>
**Channel 4: The Television Revolution**<br>
Fri 23 Sep 18:20<br>
**Controversy: Jesus the Evidence + V  + Mother Ireland**<br>
Sat 24 Sep 18:00<br>
**Who Needs Channel 4?**<br>
Wed 28 Sep 18:20<br>
**Channel 4 Then and Now conference**<br>
Fri 23 Sep 10:00–17:00 and Sat 24 Sep  10:00–17:00<br>

Regional screenings and events will be taking place at these venues across the UK (please go to **bfi.org.uk/whatson** for links): Arnolfini, Bristol; Filmhouse Edinburgh; Queen’s Film Theatre, Belfast; Y Drwm, National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth

Explore thousands of titles from across  Channel 4’s history in our free Mediatheque<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5Nzk4ODYwM119
-->
