---
layout: post
title: Kes
published: true
date: 2022-08-09
readtime: true
categories: ['BIG SCREEN CLASSICS']
tags: [Drama, Children]
metadata: 'UK 1966, 111 mins<br> Director: Kenneth Loach'
pdf: '2022-08-09-kes.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.<br>

_Kes_ was Ken Loach’s second feature film, and marks his move away from the self-conscious experimentalism of his earlier work.

As before, Loach developed a close partnership with the author of the source work, in this case Barry Hines, on whose novel _A Kestrel for a Knave_ the film is based. Loach worked with both Hines and producer Tony Garnett to adapt it as a film script.

The dominant theme of _Kes_ is the way in which the education system stifles the talents of many young working-class children, offering them little choice but to follow the narrow path laid out for them by an industrial capitalist society which sees them as fit only for unskilled manual or office work. This theme runs through much of Loach’s work.

The influence of Italian neo-realism filmmaking can be traced in _Kes_, as in _Poor Cow_ (1967). Loach explained, ‘The camera’s job was to record in a sympathetic way and to be unobtrusive, not to be slick.’ Loach and his cameraman Chris Menges didn’t, as is common in fiction films, mark spots for the actors to hit, but instead tried to accommodate the actors’ movements. Loach, though, has admitted that throughout his films, including _Kes_, ‘I lay traps, as it were,’ for example by moving furniture. The apparent simplicity and directness of Loach’s filming thus contains an element of manipulation which is hidden from both the audience and the actors.

Casting is also a striking feature of _Kes_. Colin Welland, as the English teacher, Farthing, was the only professional actor in the cast, although several, notably Brian Glover as the bullying Games teacher, went on to acting careers. All of the pupils, including Dai Bradley, who gives a remarkably natural performance as Billy, came from the Barnsley school in which the film was shot, while the headmaster was played by the school’s own head. As with several Loach films, many of the adult cast were found in local clubs where they worked as entertainers and comics. Loach has commented that he casts for ‘authenticity of age, class or region,’ believing that even skilled actors cannot disguise their class origins under the close scrutiny of the camera.

Initially, there were difficulties in getting _Kes_ shown, and it had a patchy release after opening in Doncaster. Since then, however, it has become one of Loach’s best known and admired films.  
**Ros Cranston, BFI Screenonline, screenonline.org.uk**
<br>

**The kestrel in ‘Kes’**<br>
‘We never thought of the kestrel as a symbol,’ Ken Loach claimed in _Loach on Loach_. But it is impossible to watch the British filmmaker’s humanist 1969 tale – of how the limited horizons of teenager Billy Casper are briefly opened when he trains a kestrel – and think of the falcon as anything but a symbol of freedom. While the fate of many working-class boys like Billy lies underground in one of Barnsley’s collieries, his kestrel demonstrates her mastery of the sky, soaring and swooping high above.

It’s said that the eagle is the raptor of the emperor, the peregrine that of the prince, while the smaller, more abundant kestrel is ‘used by persons of a lower rank’, according to J.E. Harting in _The Ornithology of Shakespeare_ (1871). Hence the title of Barry Hines’s book, on which _Kes_ was based: _A Kestrel for a Knave_. Harting even suggests its name could derive from ‘coystril’, meaning knave or peasant. While Kes doesn’t feature in the film as much as the title suggests, she gets her close-up when Billy shows her to his teacher, and it’s impossible not to share his reverence for this small chestnut-brown assassin.

Richard, Barry’s brother, a self-taught teen falconer, inspired the novel and trained the three kestrels that performed in the film – Freeman, Hardy and Willis (Hardy proved the most competent and willing actor). One of the three birds was even plucked from the same nest hole in Tankersley Old Hall that’s seen in the film.

_Kes_ came at a time of renewed concern for falcons and the environment, with J.A. Baker’s _The Peregrine_ and Rachel Carson’s _Silent Spring_ recently published. _Kes_ reportedly sparked a craze for training kestrels (Richard Hines tells in his autobiography how he rescued one caught on an electricity pole by its leash). But since 1970 UK kestrel numbers have fallen 44 per cent, due to urbanisation and pesticides.

After the film’s success, Disney asked to adapt Hines’s novel, but wanted Kes to survive at the end. Hines declined the rights. Many readers may be happy to know that Freeman, Hardy and Willis were hacked back to the wild, just as Richard’s kestrel, the original Kes who inspired the book and the film, was.<br>
**Isabel Stevens, _Sight and Sound_, September 2021**<br>


**KES**<br>
_Director:_ Kenneth Loach<br>
_©:_ Woodfall Films Ltd<br>
_A_ Kestrel Films _production_<br>
_Released Through:_ United Artists<br>
_Presented by:_ Woodfall Films<br>
_Producer:_ Tony Garnett<br>
_Production Supervisor:_ David Griffith<br>
_Assistant Director:_ Keith Evans<br>
_Continuity:_ Penny Eyles<br>
_Adaptation:_ Barry Hines, Kenneth Loach, Tony Garnett<br>
_Based on the novel_ Kestrel for a Knave _by:_ Barry Hines<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Chris Menges<br>
_Lighting:_ Lee Electric (Lighting)<br>
_Editor:_ Roy Watts<br>
_Art Director:_ William McCrow<br>
_Wardrobe:_ Daphne Dare<br>
_Music Composed/Conducted by:_ John Cameron<br>
_Sound Recording:_ Tony Jackson, Gerry Humphries<br>
_Sound Recorded at:_ Twickenham Film Studios<br>
_Sound Editor:_ Peter Pierce<br>
_This film was also made by:_ Peter Allchorne, David Clarke, Michael English, Arthur Evans, Paddy Holman, John Matthews, Michael Messenger, Eddie Price, Franco Rosso, Nicola Webber, Michael Barnett, Harry Daly, Jane Harris, Sean Hudson, Robert Matthews, Ray Orton, Edward Riley, Fred Ruff, Eric Wicks, Harry Bell, Jim Duffy, Terry Lewis, Mike McDuffie, Bert Payne, Anne Robinson, John Williams, Tony Woodcock<br>

_uncredited_<br>
_Technical Adviser:_ Richard Hines<br>

**Cast:**<br>
David Bradley _(Billy Casper)_<br>
Freddie Fletcher _(Jud Casper)_<br>
Lynne Perrie _(Mrs Casper)_<br>
Colin Welland _(Mr Farthing)_<br>
Brian Glover _(Mr Sugden)_<br>
Bob Bowes _(Mr Gryce)_<br>
Bernard Atha _(youth employment officer)_<br>
Laurence Bould<br>
Ted Carroll<br>
Agnes Drumgoon<br>
Desmond Guthrie<br>
The 4D Jones<br>
Joe Miller _(Mrs Casper’s friend)_<br>
Julie Shakespeare<br>
Geoffrey Banks _(maths teacher)_<br>
Duggie Brown _(milkman)_<br>
Stephen Crossland _(schoolboy)_<br>
David Glover _(Tibbutt)_<br>
Martin Harley _(younger boy)_<br>
Joey Kaye _(pub entertainer)_<br>
Robert Naylor _(MacDowall)_<br>
George Speed _(schoolboy)_<br>
Zoe Sunderland _(librarian)_<br>
Eric Bolderson _(farmer)_<br>
Beryl Carroll<br>
Billy Dean _(fish and chip shop man)_<br>
John Grayson<br>
Trevor Hesketh _(Mr Crossley)_<br>
Harry Markham<br>
Frank Norton _(schoolboy)_<br>
Leslie Stringer<br>

UK 1969<br>
111 mins<br>
<br>

**BIG SCREEN CLASSICS**<br>
**The Manchurian Candidate**<br>
Mon 1 Aug 14:40; Fri 5 Aug 18:00; Sun 14 Aug 14:40<br>
**M**<br>
Tue 2 Aug 18:15; Wed 10 Aug 20:45; Tue 23 Aug 20:50; Mon 29 Aug 12:00<br>
**Sweet Smell of Success**<br>
Tue 2 Aug 20:50; Sat 13 Aug 18:10; Mon 29 Aug 18:30<br>
**Dance, Girl, Dance**<br>
Wed 3 Aug 18:00 (+ intro by Pamela Hutchinson, Film Critic and Historian); Thu 18 Aug 20:45<br>
**Gaslight**<br>
Thu 4 Aug 18:15; Mon 8 Aug 20:45<br>
**Persona**<br>
Fri 5 Aug 20:50; Thu 11 Aug 21:00; Wed 31 Aug 18:20 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer at Large)<br>
**Raging Bull**<br>
Sat 6 Aug 20:30; Thu 11 Aug 20:30; Fri 26 Aug 20:30<br>
**La Haine**<br>
Sat 6 Aug 21:00; Fri 19 Aug 20:50; Wed 24 Aug 18:10 (+ intro by Ginette Vincendeau, Professor of film studies at King’s College London)<br>
**Citizen Kane**<br>
Sun 7 Aug 14:30; Tue 16 Aug 18:15; Wed 24 Aug 20:40<br>
**The White Ribbon (Das weisse Band)**<br>
Tue 9 Aug 17:50; Sat 27 Aug 17:50<br>
**Kes**<br>
Tue 9 Aug 20:45; Mon 15 Aug 18:15; Tue 30 Aug 20:40<br>
**The Night of the Hunter**<br>
Wed 10 Aug 18:10 (+ intro by Jason Wood, BFI Director of Public Programme and Audiences); Mon 22 Aug 20:45; Sun 28 Aug 12:20<br>
**Notorious**<br>
Thu 11 Aug 18:10; Wed 17 Aug 20:45; Sun 21 Aug 12:20; Thu 25 Aug 18:15<br>
**Bigger Than Life**<br>
Fri 12 Aug 20:40; Wed 17 Aug 18:20 (+ intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer at Large)<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**  


