---
layout: post
title: Viy
published: true
date: 2022-10-28
readtime: true
categories: ['IN DREAMS ARE MONSTERS']
tags: [Horror]
metadata: 'USSR 1967, 77 mins<br> Directors: K. Yershov, G. Kropachyov'
pdf: '2022-10-28-Viy.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Circumventing the restrictions of Soviet film production, _Viy_ is a loose adaptation of a Nikolai Gogol story in which a seminary student is asked to say prayers for the soul of a young, recently deceased woman who turns out to be a witch. Over three nights, the witch torments him relentlessly. With special effects by Aleksandr Ptushko, _Viy_ possesses nightmarish imagery that has lost none of its punch with the passage of time.  
**Anna Bogutskaya, bfi.org.uk**

Soviet cinema was no stranger to horrific imagery, as anyone who has seen _Battleship Potemkin_ (1925) or _Come and See_ (1985) can attest. But the Bolsheviks perceived the horror genre itself as inherently reactionary, and in the first 58 years of the USSR’s existence it produced only one title that could unambiguously be described as a horror film, at least until 1980’s _Savage Hunt of King Stakh_. _Viy_, however, was not just any old folk-horror yarn, but adapted from a short story by one of the most revered figures in Russian literature – the novelist, short-story writer and playwright Nikolai Gogol (1809-52), whom Vladimir Nabokov called ‘the strangest prose-poet Russia ever produced’.

Two factors may have helped Konstantin Yershov and Georgi Kropachyov, both novice directors, convince Mosfilm to back their project. First, it was conceived as a patriotic ‘correction’ to Mario Bava’s _Black Sunday_  (_La maschera del demonio_, 1960), based only very loosely on the same Gogol story and seen in the USSR as a Hollywood travesty of the source material, probably because the version distributed there was the American dub. Secondly, art direction and special effects were by Aleksandr Ptushko, who also received a co-writing credit. Ptushko, a visionary on the level of the Polish-Russian pioneer Wladyslaw Starewicz and Ray Harryhausen, had directed the first Soviet animated feature and a number of acclaimed live-action fantasies such as _The Stone Flower_ (1946) and _Sadko_ (1953), and his influence permeates the film.

_Viy_ begins with scenes of boisterous student high jinks before following three seminarians through an increasingly desolate landscape in search of food and shelter. They spend the night at a farm where one of them, Khoma, is assaulted by an old witch and beats her to death in disgust, only to see the dying hag transformed into a beautiful young maiden. He flees in panic but, through a series of unfortunate circumstances, finds himself locked in a church, forced to hold vigil over the young woman’s corpse for three terrifying nights. Suffice to say, things don’t go well for him, and thanks to effects (stop motion, back projection, puppets and so on) that transcend the limitations of their time, the uncanny occurrences in the church can still generate a frisson. The witch’s frenzied attempts to break into the student’s hastily scrawled magic circle begin with her trying to breach the invisible wall like a manic Marcel Marceau, and escalate to her using her coffin as a battering ram-cum-surfboard. When all hell finally breaks loose (‘I summon the vampires! I summon the werewolves!’), it’s almost a relief, especially when the dreaded ‘Viy’ turns out to be a chonky gnome, though this might trigger unpleasant flashbacks in anyone traumatised as a child by the Nome King in _Return to Oz_ (1985).

Gogol, born and brought up in Ukraine, first tasted literary success with _Evenings on a Farm near Dikanka_ (1831), a collection of stories praised for their authentic depiction of Ukrainian peasant life; most are of a macabre, ironic bent, and feature witches or devils. ‘Viy’, dismissed by Nabokov as ‘a gooseflesh story, not particularly effective’, appears in _Mirgorod_, his second collection (1835). Both story and film begin with Gogol’s claim that ‘Viy is a colossal creation of the imagination of simple folk. The tale itself is a purely popular legend. And I tell it without change, in all its simplicity, exactly as I heard it told to me.’ In fact, it seems to be entirely a product of the author’s own imagination, making this a literary precursor to the ‘based on a true story’ horror trope – cf _The Texas Chain Saw Massacre_ (1974) and _The Blair Witch Project_ (1999). But the film makes it feel as though the story has sprung directly from Ukrainian soil.  
**Anne Billson, _Sight & Sound_, April 2021**  

**VIY**  
_Directors_: K. Yershov, G. Kropachyov  
_Production Company_: Mosfilm  
_Screenplay_: A. Ptushko, K. Yershov, G. Kropachov  
_Based on_ Viy _by_: Nikolai Gogol  
_Directors of Photography:_ V. Pishchalnikov, F. Provorov  
_Editors:_ R. Pesetskaya, T. Zubova  
_Art Director:_  A. Ptushko  
_Special Effects_: A. Ptushko  
_Music_: K. Khachaturyan  

**Cast**  
Leonid Kuravlyov _(Khoma)_  
Natalya Varley _(mistress of house)_  
Aleksei Glazyrin _(Cossack officer)_  
Nicolai Kutuzov _(witch)_  
P. Veskliarov _(rector)_  

USSR 1967  
77 mins  
<br>

**IN DREAMS ARE MONSTERS**  
**Nosferatu (Nosferatu – Eine Symphonie des Grauens)**  
Mon 17 Oct 20:50; Sun 13 Nov 15:50 (+ intro by Silent Film Curator Bryony Dixon); Sat 19 Nov 14:10  
**Frankenstein**  
Tue 18 Oct 20:50; Fri 28 Oct 18:20; Tue 8 Nov 18:20; Sun 27 Nov 13:00  
**The Skeleton Key**  
Wed 19 Oct 18:00; Mon 14 Nov 20:45  
**Meet the Monsters: A Season Introduction**  
Thu 20 Oct 19:30 BFI YouTube  
**I Walked With a Zombie**  
Thu 20 Oct 20:40; Tue 1 Nov 18:10  
**Creature from the Black Lagoon (3D)**  
Sat 22 Oct 18:15 (+ pre-recorded intro by Mallory O’Meara, award winning and bestselling author of ‘The Lady from the Black Lagoon’); Sat 29 Oct 11:40; Tue 1 Nov 20:50  
**In Dreams Are Monsters Quiz**  
Sun 23 Oct 19:00-22:00 Blue Room  
**Kuroneko (Yabu no naka no kuroneko)**  
Tue 25 Oct 20:45; Mon 31 Oct 21:00; Fri 18 Nov 18:15  
**The Fly**  
Wed 26 Oct 21:00  
**La Llorona**  
Thu 27 Oct 20:30; Mon 7 Nov 21:00  
**Celluloid Screams and Live Cinema UK presents: Ghostwatch + Q&A**  
Fri 28 Oct 20:20  
**Viy**  
Fri 28 Oct 20:45; Tue 8 Nov 20:50  
**A Nightmare on Elm Street**  
Sat 29 Oct 18:30; Wed 30 Nov 20:50  
**Candyman**  
Sat 29 Oct 20:45; Thu 17 Nov 20:50 (+ intro)  
**Nightbreed – Director’s Cut**  
Sun 30 Oct 15:10 (+ intro); Sat 12 Nov 20:35  
**28 Days Later**  
Mon 31 Oct 18:00 (+ Q&A with director Danny Boyle); Sat 26 Nov 20:45  
**Us**  
Tue 1 Nov 20:40; Sat 19 Nov 15:10; Tue 29 Nov 20:40  
**The Autopsy of Jane Doe**  
Wed 2 Nov 18:10; Sat 26 Nov 20:40  
**Let’s Scare Jessica to Death**  
Wed 2 Nov 20:45; Sat 19 Nov 20:45  
**Blacula**  
Thu 3 Nov 20:55; Sat 26 Nov 13:00  
**Cronos**  
Fri 4 Nov 18:30; Sat 19 Nov 12:10; Sun 20 Nov 18:30  
**Fright Night**  
Fri 4 Nov 20:50; Tue 22 Nov 20:40 (+ intro)  
**Possession**  
Sat 5 Nov 20:20 (+ intro by author Kier-La Janisse); Sun 27 Nov 15:30  
**Ganja & Hess**  
Mon 7 Nov 18:00; Sat 26 Nov 15:20  
**Inferno**  
Wed 9 Nov 20:40; Sat 26 Nov 18:20  
**The Entity**  
Fri 11 Nov 17:55; Tue 15 Nov 20:30  
**Def by Temptation**  
Wed 16 Nov 18:10 (+ intro); Sat 26 Nov 18:10  
**Jennifer’s Body**  
Sun 20 Nov 15:15; Mon 21 Nov 18:00; Fri 25 Nov 20:45  
**Pontypool**  
Mon 21 Nov 20:30; Sun 27 Nov 12:20  
**Under the Shadow**  
Wed 23 Nov 20:40; Tue 29 Nov 18:10  
**Ouija: Origin of Evil**  
Thu 24 Nov 20:40; Mon 28 Nov 18:10  
**Pet Sematary**  
Fri 25 Nov 18:15; Mon 28 Nov 20:40  
**Good Manners (As Boas Maneiras)**  
Sun 27 Nov 18:10; Wed 30 Nov 20:25  

**IN DREAMS ARE MONSTERS EVENTS**  
**City Lit at BFI: Screen Horrors – Screen Monsters**  
Thu 20 Oct – Thu 15 Dec 18:30-20:30  
**Beyond Nollywood World Premiere: Inside Life + Q&A with director Clarence A Peters**  
Sat 29 Oct 14:00  
**Matchbox Cine presents House of Psychotic Women**  
Sat 5 Nov 17:50  
**Son of Ingagi + Panel Discussion**  
Wed 9 Nov 18:10  
**Live Commentary with Evolution of Horror, Brain Rot and The Final Girls**  
Sat 19 Nov 18:00  
**Big Monster Energy**  
Tue 22 Nov 18:30  
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
