---
layout: post
title: In My Skin
published: true
date: 2022-05-07
readtime: true
categories: ['CRUEL FLESH<br>FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY']
tags: [Drama, Horror]
metadata: 'France 2002, 95 mins<br> Director: Marina de Van'
pdf: '2022-05-07-in-my-skin.pdf'
---

**The films of the New French Extremity and the accompanying focus on Gaspar Noé examine an important, controversial and highly violent cinema movement. They are not suitable for all.**

**The film you are about to watch may contain very dark themes, graphic imagery, and scenes of a very upsetting nature including sexual violence and body horror.**

In the past few years, French cinema has achieved a reputation for provoking its audiences – not through ideas, but in the blunt aesthetic extremes of excessively bloody and sexual content. The explicit sex in _Romance_ (1999) by Catherine Breillat, the nine-minute rape scene from Gaspar Noé’s _Irreversible_ (2002) and the stylised cannibalism of Claire Denis’ _Trouble Every Day_ (2001) are among the most unsettling subjects and scenes of this emerging tendency. Marina de Van has collaborated as an actress and screenwriter with François Ozon – another exponent of transgressive French cinema – and the graphic way her debut film explores a woman’s relationship with her own body, involving self-harm and auto-cannibalism, places her within this tendency, which James Quandt has called the ‘New French Extreme’.

And yet there’s a sincerity of intention driving this disturbing film that gives it a captivating socio-political relevance and genuine horror that the work of many of de Van’s contemporaries lack. Its almost unwatchably graphic scenes consider the philosophical complexities concerning our relationship with the body. Dismissing the obvious explanations for self-harm and the conditions that give rise to it, _In My Skin_ addresses the question: what are the consequences when your body becomes, even to yourself, purely an object?

An accident at a party triggers the self-harm by the lead character Esther (played by de Van). The randomness of this catalytic event breaks with the common explanations for self-harm, based around low self-esteem, sustained emotional trauma and as a coping mechanism in the angst-ridden teen years. ‘Don’t you like your body?’ her concerned boyfriend asks, but contrived as this may seem, it’s Esther’s seemingly honest response – ‘no, no, it’s nice’ – which breaks with convention. A successful thirtysomething on the verge of promotion, Esther shares a happy and fulfilled private life with Vincent.  The party disrupts their contentment; it’s only when she notices the external evidence of her injury (the blood on the carpet) that she becomes aware of her body. Until then, she had felt no pain. Like the dead arm we may sometimes find by our sides in the morning, Esther is disturbed to experience her body as something disassociated from herself, something disconnected or alien; this is the original philosophical rupture that provokes her subsequent actions.

It is not an isolated trauma. Esther’s sense of bodily alienation is mirrored by her social environment: at work she tells a friend how suffocated she feels, she ‘can’t breathe’ after long hours in front of a computer screen. This follows a secret trip to the office storeroom, where she frenetically cuts open the stitches on her leg. Here the act is one of release, the transgression of routine, the attempt to feel alive after the stale, deadening air of the workplace. Here we see how timeless philosophical questions articulate themselves differently according to the social circumstances and perceptions of the time. For Esther, the Parisian professional, her associations with others have very weak social bonds. Falsity orders the relations she has with her colleagues (Sandrine resents Esther’s promotion, her other co-workers are barely introduced to the audience, a flash of forgettable faces). The office is buzzing but with a dull drone, everyone working hard but none fully engaged with their jobs.

In this atomised environment, Esther’s objectifying view of her own body becomes increasingly acute, and she grows obsessed with this sense of physical estrangement. At a restaurant she is unable to concentrate on her colleagues’ discussions, distracted by the carnivorous activities around her: knives slice through steaks, chicken wings are stripped of flesh, forks are stabbed into succulent duck. The sounds of mastication and cutlery grinding on plates are accentuated as the business conversation is drowned out – De Van’s filming technique encourages if not complicity with Esther, at least a certain sympathy by allowing a direct experience of her perceptions. We are also witness to a moment of surrealism as Esther sees her left arm literally detached from her elbow, and as flesh is devoured all around, the absurd vision of this lone arm lying on the table is assimilated, as though another piece of meat, with the steak and drumsticks. Desperately Esther prods at the naughty, unruly limb with her own fork.

Esther’s fetishisation of her own body is further underlined by the way the story unravels, much like a torrid love affair. Esther must lie to others: she gives evasive answers and even crashes her car to conceal the real reasons for her increasingly serious injuries. The scenes of self-devouring are reminiscent of adulterers stealing away with their lovers; Esther too elopes, to the storeroom, to a hotel room. Of course, the act of consummation is impossible; what becomes a sexual desire for penetration is always left unsatisfied.

Events are portrayed with less of the stylised aesthetic of cannibalism used by Claire Denis in _Trouble Every Day_, whose Tindersticks soundtrack and horribly beautiful photography (by Agnès Godard) made the acts meaninglessly alluring and melancholic. De Van’s animalistic scenes are too long to be anything but sickening. What justifies their repellence is de Van’s very human performance. As she stares hopelessly into the void it is clear how traumatised and confused she is by her own actions.

De Van has not represented self-harm realistically – she errs on the side of fantasy laced with extreme violence and moments of surrealism – but this forces a fresh horror at the phenomenon that is worth preserving. Esther is self-aware enough to realise this horror, and at moments of comparative normality (at a cashpoint, in a pharmacy), she has haunting flashes of recollection that clearly disturb her. Most affecting perhaps is the genuine compassion she has for her body – nothing close to vanity, she really does, simply, ‘like it’, rather pathetically preserving the pieces she removes in toilet paper like milk teeth left under the pillow.

The most horrifying image is perhaps that of Esther locked in an infatuated embrace with herself; the act of love, only possible with two people, is conducted in blood and solitude. Self-harm here is equated with self-estrangement, an attempt to deal with problems at the basest and most primitive level, a retreat back to the flesh – inside the skin and within oneself.  It is, as de Van makes clear, a desperate response, the result of an absence of existing social bonds. The crisis, the internal disunity is instead faced alone, despite the world, rather than in relation to it. It is a necessarily doomed strategy for survival.  
**Emilie Bickerton, _Sight & Sound_, November 2004**
<br><br>

**IN MY SKIN (DANS MA PEAU)**  
_Director_: Marina de Van  
©: Lazennec & Associés  
©_/Presented by_: Les Productions Lazennec  
_Presented with the participation of_: CNC - Centre national de la cinématographie, Canal+  
_Presented in association with_:  Natexis Banques Populaires Images 2  
_Presented with the support of_:  Région Île-de-France  
_Produced with a script grant from the_:  La Région Centre  
_Produced with the support of_:  Fondation Beaumarchais  
_International Sales_: Jacques Le Glou,  Mercure Distribution  
_Produced by_: Laurence Farenc  
_Unit Production Manager_: Thierry Muscat  
_Unit Manager_: Serge Desfilles  
_Production Manager_: Laurent Lecêtre  
_Production Controller_: France Dubois  
_Administration_: Pascal Tillou  
_Location Manager_: Benjamin Brunet  
_Actors’ Director_: Marc Adjadj  
_Associate Actors’ Director_: Adrien de Van  
_1st Assistant Director_: Hubert Barbin  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Cyril Duval  
_Assistant Director (Preparation)_:  Jean-Louis Frémont  
_Script Supervisor_: Karen Waks  
_Casting Director_: Brigitte Moidon  
_Screenplay_: Marina de Van  
_Dialogue_: Marina de Van  
_Director of Photography_: Pierre Barougier  
_Steadicam Operator_: Mathieu Caudroy  
_Stills Photography_: Christophe Henry  
_Editor_: Mike Fromentin  
_Art Director_: Baptiste Glaymann  
_Set Decorator_: Christelle Maisonneuve  
_Properties_: Frank Pitussi  
_Special Effects Props_: Fabien Tuizat  
_Costumes_: Marielle Robaut  
_Key Make-up Artist_: Thierry Lécuyer  
_Key Special Effects Make-up_: Dominique Colladant  
_Front Titles_: Sparx  
_End Titles_: Microfilms  
_Laboratory_: GTC  
_Digital Grading_: Digimage  
_Digital Laboratory_: GTC Numérique  
_Music Composed/Performed by_:  E.S.T. – Esbjörn Svensson Trio  
_Additional Music Composed/Performed by_: Rodolphe Vassails, Philippe Lavergne  
_Music Recordist/Mixer_: Stéphane Reichart  
_Sound Recordist_: Jérôme Aghion  
_Boom Operator_: Paulin Sagna  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Cyril Holtz  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Jérôme Wiciak  
_Sound Effects_: Christophe Bourreau  
_Sound Effects Recordist_: Jean-Paul Hurier  
_Post-synchronization_: Jean-Paul Hurier  
_Technical Advisers_: Fabrice Escot,  Antoine Auboiron  
_Thanks_: Gérard Brach, Alain Rocca  
_Dolby Sound Consultant_: Francis Pérreard  
_Studio_: Hydrex Studios

**Cast**  
Marina de Van _(Esther)_  
Laurent Lucas _(Vincent)_  
Léa Drucker _(Sandrine)_  
Marc Rioufol _(Henri)_  
François Lamotte _(Pierre)_  
Chantal Baroin, Thierry Vermuth _(guests)_  
Adrien de Van _(intern)_  
Giovanni Portincasa _(Modier)_  
Damien Roussineau, Wilfried Malori _(swimmers)_  
Thomas de Van, Caroline Brunner _(serving staff)_  
Alain Rimoux _(pharmacist)_  
Thibault de Montalembert _(Daniel)_  
Dominique Reymond, Bernard Alane _(clients)_

France 2002©  
95 mins

The screening on Sat 7 May will be introduced by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London<br>
<br>

**CRUEL FLESH: FILMS OF THE  NEW FRENCH EXTREMITY**<br>
**Carne + La Bouche de Jean-Pierre**<br>
Sun 1 May 11:50; Thu 12 May 20:45 (+ Q&A with Lucile Hadžihalilovic)<br>
**Baise-moi**<br>
Sun 1 May 18:20; Sat 7 May 20:50<br>
**The Ordeal (Calvaire)**<br>
Mon 2 May 12:30; Sun 22 May 18:20<br>
**Man Bites Dog (C’est arrivé près de chez vous)**<br>
Mon 2 May 15:10; Tue 10 May 20:55<br>
**Sex and Death, but Make It Arthouse**<br>
Tue 3 May 18:10<br>
**Trouble Every Day**<br>
Tue 3 May 20:30 (+ intro by writer and creative Sophie Monks Kaufman); Tue 24 May 20:45<br>
**Criminal Lovers (Les Amants criminels)**<br>
Wed 4 May 20:50; Sat 14 May 12:00<br>
**Pola X**<br>
Thu 5 May 20:25; Sat 28 May 17:50<br>
**Romance (Romance X)**<br>
Fri 6 May 18:00 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Tue 17 May 20:45<br>
**Philosophical Screens: Romance**<br>
Fri 6 May 20:00<br>
**In My Skin (Dans ma peau)**<br>
Sat 7 May 17:50 (+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London); Thu 19 May 20:40<br>
**High Tension (aka Switchblade Romance)  (Haute Tension)**<br>
Mon 9 May 18:00 (+ pre-recorded intro by author Alexandra West); Sat 28 May 12:20<br>
**Inside (À l’intérieur)**<br>
Sat 14 May 20:50; Thu 26 May 18:20<br>
**Them (Ils)**<br>
Mon 16 May 20:50; Sun 29 May 18:20<br>
**Irreversible** **(Irréversible)** (theatrical version)<br>
Sat 21 May 17:45<br>
**Martyrs**<br>
Sat 28 May 20:50; Tue 31 May 20:40<br>
**Horror à la Française**<br>
Free to view on the BFI YouTube channel from  11-31 May<br>
**BFI Courses: City Lit at the BFI:  New French Extremity**<br>
Every Tue from 10-31 May 18:30-20:30<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjEzODE1NzcwXX0=
-->
