---
layout: post
title: The Red Shoes
published: true
date: 2022-05-01
readtime: true
categories: ['SCREEN EPIPHANY']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'UK 1948, 133 mins<br> Directors: Michael Powell, Emeric Pressburger'
pdf: '2022-05-01-red-shoes.pdf'
---

Actor and singer Keala Settle (_The Greatest Showman_) introduces a film that has inspired her. Powell and Pressburger’s classic, loosely based on Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale, is hailed by directors including Scorsese, Spielberg and Coppola as one of the all-time greatest films. Filmed in glorious Technicolor, Shearer stars as a ballet dancer who joins a prestigious company and must decide between her career and her relationship with a young composer.

Keala Settle appears in _& Juliet_ at the Shaftesbury Theatre until Saturday 18 June.

**5 things to know about ‘The Red Shoes’**<br>
**1 It’s a spectacular rejection of realism**<br>
_The Red Shoes_, which premiered on 6 September 1948, followed a tremendous run of films by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger. Between 1943 and 1947, they made _The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp_, _A Canterbury Tale_, _‘I Know Where I’m Going!’_, _A Matter of Life and Death_ and _Black Narcissus_. For their next trick, they took a decisive step away from the tendency towards realism in postwar cinema, pushing the emotional expressiveness of Technicolor photography yet further, in collaboration with genius cinematographer Jack Cardiff.

Pressburger had originally worked on the idea for the film before the war. Producer Alexander Korda had hired him to write a script that combined the story of the dancer Nijinsky, and his time at Sergei Diaghilev’s Ballet Russes, with the Hans Christian Anderson fairytale about enchanted shoes that force the wearer to dance on and on until death. He’d also instructed Pressburger to write a role for Merle Oberon, but as that passion cooled, so did the producer’s interest in the film.

Powell and Pressburger returned to the idea in 1946, convinced its time had come: ‘We had all been told for 10 years to go out and die for freedom and democracy,’ Powell recalled. ‘Now the war was over, _The Red Shoes_ told us to go out and die for art.’

The gamble paid off eventually. While the initial release in Britain was very small, as the Rank Organisation resented the fact that it had gone wildly over budget, _The Red Shoes_ played for two years in New York – and was soon acclaimed a triumph.

**2 It’s a dance film made by dancers**<br>
While some ballet films use stand-ins and cutaways to make it appear that their actors have the right moves, Powell and Pressburger cast dancers instead. Moira Shearer, who plays the heroine, rising star Vicky Page, was a featured dancer at Sadler’s Wells. French prima ballerina Ludmilla Tchérina played one here too – the glamorous Boronskaya. Léonid Massine, former choreographer for Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes, played Grischa Ljubow, who so brutally coaches Page; while Robert Helpmann played the lead male dancer in the company, Ivan Boleslawsky, and also choreographed the astonishing extended ballet sequence.

Shearer proved an elegant and natural actress on camera – easily able to hold her own with co-stars Anton Walbrook as impresario Lermontov and Marius Goring as young composer Julian Craster. As for the other dancers, if their performances at times veer toward the high-key gestural style of ballet mime, then that all adds to the film’s heady, hyper-real excitement.

**3 It’s inspired by one star… and created another**<br>
The film’s scenario is said to have been inspired by the moment when Diaghilev saw 14-year-old Diana Gould in the premiere of Frederick Ashton’s ballet _Leda and the Swan_. He intended to hire her for his own company but died before that could happen. Anna Pavlova was similarly impressed by Gould, saying she was the only English dancer ‘who had a soul’, but she too died before they could work together.

One of Lermontov and Vicky’s early exchanges sets up both the film’s morbid obsession and its central question: what is life without art? Lermontov asks Vicky: ‘Why do you want to dance?’ Her ingenuous reply is: ‘Why do you want to live?’

In truth, there was probably more than a little of the Lermontov about director Michael Powell. His film made a star out of Shearer, as much as Lermontov’s ballet launches Vicky to fame. Shearer retired from ballet in 1953, but continued to act, becoming such a popular household name that her wedding to Ludovic Kennedy in 1950 was thronged by well-wishers – and she danced twice more for Powell, in 1951’s _The Tales of Hoffman_ and in 1960’s _Peeping Tom_.

**4 It’s about the agony of artistic expression**<br>
Lermontov chides Vicky: ‘Don’t forget, a great impression of simplicity can only be achieved by great agony of body and spirit.’ Few films reveal, either as cruelly or as eloquently as this one, the sacrifices that artists make. We see more bruising rehearsals than standing ovations, and yet, the Ballet Lermontov dances on.

Page’s final, anguished choice between love and art only makes tangible the decision that Lermontov clearly made long ago. Walbrook, who plays him so brilliantly, was gay, as was Diaghilev. Lermontov knows nothing of Page’s ‘charms’ and cares less, he says; his ‘family’ is his company, and he asserts that: ‘The dancer who relies on the comforts of human love will never be a great dancer. Never!’

As certain critics have noted, there is a striking gay subtext to _The Red Shoes_, but it is a tragic one – Lermontov is a lonely figure whose obsessive nature demonstrates the danger of living for art rather than love.

**5 From Scorsese to _La La Land_, its influence lives on**<br>
_The Red Shoes_ is one of the most widely influential movies of all time. Regularly hailed as a favourite in critics’ polls and by directors including Martin Scorsese (‘It’s one of the true miracles of film history’), Francis Ford Coppola, Steven Spielberg and Brian De Palma, it has also been reworked by artists outside the cinema. Kate Bush’s 1993 album _The Red Shoes_ was inspired by the film, for example. Coming full circle, Matthew Bourne choreographed the film as a ballet at Sadler’s Wells in 2017.

The film also has an afterlife in the classic Hollywood musical. Gene Kelly screened the film multiple times for the producers of _An American in Paris_ (1951), as he persuaded them to let him include a ballet sequence in the film. He did, and in the following year’s _Singin’ in the Rain_ too. The popularity of the ballet sequence as a genre trope was underlined when Damien Chazelle included one in his pastiche _La La Land_ (2016).

There are several, pointed, references to the film in a very different musical, the 1985 Broadway adaptation _A Chorus Line_. That’s not a direct cinematic influence but rather a testament to the film’s impact on generations of girls. The book for that musical was based on interviews with New York dancers, several of whom confided that _The Red Shoes_ inspired their choice of career.

In a 1970 interview with _The_ _New York Times_, Shearer expressed a little self-deprecating regret on this score: ‘I’m a bit embarrassed whenever I hear how many girls were influenced by it. The dancing in it wasn’t terribly good.’<br>
**Pamela Hutchinson, bfi.org.uk, 6 September 2018**<br>

**THE RED SHOES**<br>
_The Entire Production Directed, Produced and Written by:_ Michael Powell, Emeric Pressburger<br>
_©:_ Independent Producers<br>
_A production of_ The Archers _presented_ by J. Arthur Rank _released through_ General Film Distributors<br>
_Assistant Producer:_ George R. Busby<br>
_Assistant Director:_ Sydney S. Streeter<br>
_Continuity:_ Doreen North<br>
_Additional Dialogue by:_ Keith Winter<br>
_From an Original Screenplay by:_ Emeric Pressburger<br>
_Based on the story by:_ Hans Christian Andersen<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Jack Cardiff<br>
_Colour Control:_ Natalie Kalmus<br>
_Associate:_ Joan Bridge<br>
_Camera Operator:_ Christopher Challis<br>
_Technicolor Composite Photography:_ F. George Gunn, E. Hague<br>
_Editor:_ Reginald Mills<br>
_Liaison Editor:_ John Seabourne Jr<br>
_Production Designed by:_ Hein Heckroth<br>
_Art Director:_ Arthur Lawson<br>
_Special Paintings:_ Ivor Beddoes, Józef Natanson<br>
_Scenic Artist:_ Alfred Roberts<br>
_Miss Shearer’s Dresses by:_ Jacques Fath of Paris, Mattli of London<br>
_Mlle Tchérina’s Dresses by:_ Carven of Paris<br>
_Wardrobe:_ Dorothy Edwards<br>
_Music Composed Arranged and Conducted by:_ Brian Easdale<br>
_Music [Played by]:_ The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra<br>
_Music [Aria Sung by]:_ Margherita Grandi<br>
_Music [of Café de Paris Sequence]:_ Ted Heath’s Kenny Baker Swing Group<br>
_The Ballet of the Red Shoes Orchestra Conducted by:_ Sir Thomas Beecham Bart<br>
_Music Recorder:_ Ted Drake<br>
_The Ballet of the Red Shoes Choreography by:_ Robert Helpmann<br>
_Part of the Shoemaker Created/Danced by:_ Leonide Massine<br>
_Assistant Maître de Ballet:_ Alan Carter<br>
_Assistant Maîtresse de Ballet:_ Joan Harris<br>
_Sound:_ Charles Poulton<br>
_Sound System:_ Western Electric<br>
_Dubbing:_ Gordon MacCullum<br>
_Made at_:  D&P Studios, Pinewood Studios<br>
_uncredited_<br>
_Production Assistant:_ Gwladys Jenks<br>
_Production Secretary:_ Marjorie Mein<br>
_2nd Assistant Director:_ Kenneth Rick<br>
_3rd Assistant Directors:_ J.M. Gibson, Lawrence G. Knight<br>
_Assistant Continuity:_ Joanna Busby<br>
_Focus Puller:_ George Minassian<br>
_Clapper Loaders:_ Bob Kindred, John Morgan<br>
_Stills:_ George Cannon<br>
_Assistant Stills:_ Alistair Phillips<br>
_Special Stills:_ Cornel Lucas<br>
_Assistant Editor:_ Noreen Ackland<br>
_2nd Assistant Editors:_ Tony Haynes, Lawrence G. Knight<br>
_Assistant Art Director:_ Elven Webb<br>
_Draughtsmen:_ Don Picton, Vic Wilkins, V. Shaw, Alan Withy, G. Heavens, Bernard Goodwin<br>
_Wardrobe:_ Elsie Withers<br>
_Masks:_ Terence Morgan II<br>
_Make-up Supervisor:_ Ernie Gasser<br>
_Make-up:_ Eric Carter<br>
_Boom Operator:_ Al Burton<br>
_Dubbing Editor:_ Leonard Trumm<br>

**Cast**<br>
Anton Walbrook _(Boris Lermontov)_<br>
Marius Goring _(Julian Craster)_<br>
Moira Shearer _(Victoria Page)_<br>
Robert Helpmann _(Ivan Boleslawsky)_<br>
Leonide Massine _(Grischa Ljubov)_<br>
Albert Basserman _(Ratov)_<br>
Ludmilla Tcherina _(Irina Boronskaja)_<br>
Esmond Knight _(Livingstone ‘Livy’ Montague)_<br>
Jean Short _(Terry)_<br>
Gordon Littmann _(Ike)_<br>
Julia Lang _(a balletomane)_<br>
Bill Shine _(a balletomane’s mate)_<br>
Austin Trevor _(Professor Palmer)_<br>
Eric Berry _(Dimitri)_<br>
Irene Browne _(Lady Neston)_<br>
Jerry Verno _(George, stage-door keeper)_<br>
Derek Elphinstone _(Lord Oldham)_<br>
Madame Rambert _(herself)_<br>
Joy Rawlins _(Gwladys, Vicky’s friend)_<br>
Marcel Poncin _(M. Boudin)_<br>
Michel Bazalgette _(M. Rideaut)_<br>
Yvonne Andre _(Vicky’s dresser)_<br>
Hay Petrie _(Boisson)_<br>
Alan Carter, Joan Harris _(solo dancers)_<br>
Joan Sheldon, Paula Dunning, Brian Ashbridge, Denis Carey, Lynne Dorval, Helen Ffrance, Robert Dorning, Eddie Gaillard, Paul Hammond, Tommy Linden, Trisha Linova, Anna Marinova, Guy Massey, John Regan, Peggy Sager, Ruth Sendler _(dancers in ‘The Ballet of The Red Shoes’)_<br>
Hilda Gaunt _(accompanist)_<br>
_uncredited_<br>
Richard George _(doorman)_<br>
Peggy Sager, Audrey Harman<br>

UK 1948©<br>
133 mins<br>



**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
