---
layout: post
title: Kes
published: true
date: 2022-01-30
readtime: true
categories: ['BFI FAMILIES']
tags: [Drama, Children]
metadata: 'UK 1969, 111 mins<br> Director: Kenneth Loach'
pdf: '2022-01-30-kes.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.<br>

**What’s it about?**<br>
Young Billy lives in a South Yorkshire mining community where he endures harsh treatment at home and at school. His life changes for the better, however, when he starts looking after a young kestrel and ultimately finds a skill that he’s interested in pursuing. _Kes_, both funny and bleak, is an uncompromising look at unlocking potential, and a true classic from one of the UK’s finest directors.<br>

**The kestrel in ‘Kes’**<br>
‘We never thought of the kestrel as a symbol,’ Ken Loach claimed in _Loach on Loach_. But it is impossible to watch the British filmmaker’s humanist 1969 tale – of how the limited horizons of teenager Billy Casper are briefly opened when he trains a kestrel – and think of the falcon as anything but a symbol of freedom. While the fate of many working-class boys like Billy lies underground in one of Barnsley’s collieries, his kestrel demonstrates her mastery of the sky, soaring and swooping high above.

It’s said that the eagle is the raptor of the emperor, the peregrine that of the prince, while the smaller, more abundant kestrel is ‘used by persons of a lower rank’, according to J.E. Harting in _The Ornithology of Shakespeare_ (1871). Hence the title of Barry Hines’s book, on which _Kes_ was based: _A Kestrel for a Knave_. Harting even suggests its name could derive from ‘coystril’, meaning knave or peasant. While Kes doesn’t feature in the film as much as the title suggests, she gets her close-up when Billy shows her to his teacher, and it’s impossible not to share his reverence for this small chestnut-brown assassin.

Richard, Barry’s brother, a self-taught teen falconer, inspired the novel and trained the three kestrels that performed in the film – Freeman, Hardy and Willis (Hardy proved the most competent and willing actor). One of the three birds was even plucked from the same nest hole in Tankersley Old Hall that’s seen in the film.

_Kes_ came at a time of renewed concern for falcons and the environment, with J.A. Baker’s _The Peregrine_ and Rachel Carson’s _Silent Spring_ recently published. _Kes_ reportedly sparked a craze for training kestrels (Richard Hines tells in his autobiography how he rescued one caught on an electricity pole by its leash). But since 1970 UK kestrel numbers have fallen 44 per cent, due to urbanisation and pesticides.

After the film’s success, Disney asked to adapt Hines’s novel, but wanted Kes to survive at the end. Hines declined the rights. Many readers may be happy to know that Freeman, Hardy and Willis were hacked back to the wild, just as Richard’s kestrel, the original Kes who inspired the book and the film, was.<br>
**Isabel Stevens, _Sight and Sound_, September 2021**<br>


**KES**<br>
_Director:_ Kenneth Loach<br>
_©:_ Woodfall Films Ltd<br>
_A_ Kestrel Films _production_<br>
_Released Through:_ United Artists<br>
_Presented by:_ Woodfall Films<br>
_Producer:_ Tony Garnett<br>
_Production Supervisor:_ David Griffith<br>
_Assistant Director:_ Keith Evans<br>
_Continuity:_ Penny Eyles<br>
_Adaptation:_ Barry Hines, Kenneth Loach, Tony Garnett<br>
_Based on the novel_ Kestrel for a Knave _by:_ Barry Hines<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Chris Menges<br>
_Lighting:_ Lee Electric (Lighting)<br>
_Editor:_ Roy Watts<br>
_Art Director:_ William McCrow<br>
_Wardrobe:_ Daphne Dare<br>
_Music Composed/Conducted by:_ John Cameron<br>
_Sound Recording:_ Tony Jackson, Gerry Humphries<br>
_Sound Recorded at:_ Twickenham Film Studios<br>
_Sound Editor:_ Peter Pierce<br>
_This film was also made by:_ Peter Allchorne, David Clarke, Michael English, Arthur Evans, Paddy Holman, John Matthews, Michael Messenger, Eddie Price, Franco Rosso, Nicola Webber, Michael Barnett, Harry Daly, Jane Harris, Sean Hudson, Robert Matthews, Ray Orton, Edward Riley, Fred Ruff, Eric Wicks, Harry Bell, Jim Duffy, Terry Lewis, Mike McDuffie, Bert Payne, Anne Robinson, John Williams, Tony Woodcock<br>

_uncredited_<br>
_Technical Adviser:_ Richard Hines<br>

**Cast:**<br>
David Bradley _(Billy Casper)_<br>
Freddie Fletcher _(Jud Casper)_<br>
Lynne Perrie _(Mrs Casper)_<br>
Colin Welland _(Mr Farthing)_<br>
Brian Glover _(Mr Sugden)_<br>
Bob Bowes _(Mr Gryce)_<br>
Bernard Atha _(youth employment officer)_<br>
Laurence Bould<br>
Ted Carroll<br>
Agnes Drumgoon<br>
Desmond Guthrie<br>
The 4D Jones<br>
Joe Miller _(Mrs Casper’s friend)_<br>
Julie Shakespeare<br>
Geoffrey Banks _(maths teacher)_<br>
Duggie Brown _(milkman)_<br>
Stephen Crossland _(schoolboy)_<br>
David Glover _(Tibbutt)_<br>
Martin Harley _(younger boy)_<br>
Joey Kaye _(pub entertainer)_<br>
Robert Naylor _(MacDowall)_<br>
George Speed _(schoolboy)_<br>
Zoe Sunderland _(librarian)_<br>
Eric Bolderson _(farmer)_<br>
Beryl Carroll<br>
Billy Dean _(fish and chip shop man)_<br>
John Grayson<br>
Trevor Hesketh _(Mr Crossley)_<br>
Harry Markham<br>
Frank Norton _(schoolboy)_<br>
Leslie Stringer<br>

UK 1969<br>
111 mins<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  
<br>

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

**BFI FAMILIES**<br>
**Bugsy Malone**<br>
Sat 12 Feb 12:20<br>
**Three-Day Television Studio Workshop**<br>
Mon 14-Wed 16 Feb 10:30-16:30<br>
**Song of the Sea**<br>
Sun 27 Feb 13:10<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTY3MTg3ODg5N119
-->
