---
layout: post
title: La Mif
published: true
date: 2022-02-19
readtime: true
categories: ['PREVIEW']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'Switzerland 2021, 110 mins<br> Director: Fred Baillif'
pdf: '2022-02-19-mif.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with director Fred Baillif, and actors Anaïs Uldry and Claudia Grob_

Written and directed by Fred Baillif, _La Mif_ is an intimate, naturalistic drama that offers a glimpse of life within a residential care home for at-risk teenage girls. The powerful and moving film received its world premiere at last year’s Berlin International Film Festival, where it won the Grand Prix for Best Film in the Generation 14plus competition. At the Zurich Film Festival it won the Golden Eye in the Focus Competition and the Ecumenical Film Prize of the Zurich Churches.

_La Mif_ (mif is the French slang word for family) is set in a residential care home in Geneva, where a group of teenage girls from difficult backgrounds live as a community with social workers. Sharing joy and pain, the forced ‘family’ experience creates unexpected tensions and intimacies. When an incident arises, the fall-out reveals the weaknesses of the outdated contemporary social care system.

The film was developed over a period of two years by Fred Baillif, a former social worker, with the collaboration of non-professional actors made up of residents and staff of a children’s home. The ensemble cast includes Claudia Grob, Anaïs Uldry, Kassia Da Costa, Joyce Esther Ndayisenga, Charlie Areddy, Amélie Tonsi, Amandine Golay and Sara Tulu, who deliver moving and  dynamic performances.

Exploring its characters’ stories individually and collectively, _La Mif_  is an empathetic and emotional examination of the juvenile care system, ploughing the line between documentary and fiction.

**Director’s statement**  
In search of natural performances and undiscovered talents, I have developed a direct cinema style based on real people and improvisation. This process started here with individual interviews with each of the residents and the employees of a children’s home. We then carried out  improv workshops over two years, which progressively allowed characters to emerge. I gathered all the elements that had come out and wrote a script. It didn’t have dialogues, but a general plot, an outline and some punchlines. The director of the children’s home,  Claudia Grob (Lora), shared with me her strong frustration towards the youth protection system and doing so, she extremely inspired me.

Most of the scenes take place within the real children’s home, which allowed us to work in a flexible way in an environment that was familiar to them. With this choice, the boundaries with documentary were blurred and made the setting an essential aspect of the story. After two years of preparation, the lack of written dialogue prevented us from getting classic funding options but the girls were becoming adults so we decided to shoot the film anyway. In just over two weeks, the film was shot with 20,000 CHF [Swiss francs] of mine, which made me the producer.

All the dialogues were improvised and our flexibility allowed us to adapt the story to the actors’ performances. In the editing phase, like in a documentary, the story evolved again based on what was captured. A first edit made the local fundraising possible, reaching RTS, Cinéforom and BAK with around half a million CHF.

Even though Claudia Grob was to be the lead character, my desire to show various point**s** of views pushed me in the direction of a hyperlink film.  The young girls all had equal opportunities to occupy the story, depending on their desires and their inspiration in the moment while shooting. Alongside, the social workers also agreed to be part of the film and to interpret characters that would be close to their reality.

This is what I tried to achieve artistically. Moreover, this film is a social work project. These girls with intense backgrounds had to be heard, whether they had suffered abuse or not. Therefore, I trusted them through the process of being part of the film from the beginning.  
**Production notes**

Fred Baillif describes his Berlinale award-winning docudrama as ‘a hyperlink film’. The term may sound clinical and impersonal, and it belies the turbulent intimacy he and the young cast of _La Mif_ – residents and staff of a Swiss children’s home – bring to the material. He’s actually referring to how the film’s action is replayed across its individual sections, spooling consecutively through seven girls, with their specific traumas and troubles, and finally Lora (Claudia Grob), the home’s director, battling her own demons. Events gradually reveal different perspectives and motivations. But this is no puzzle to solve; there is no ultimate truth around which to coalesce. It’s a mosaic whose pieces only reveal how fractured and fragile is the system within which they all exist.

Baillif, himself a former social worker, collaborated with his non-professional cast over two years, encouraging discussions about their lives, facilitating improvisations and then designing an outline (alongside co-writer Stéphane Mitchell) from which they can extrapolate on camera. It’s a bold, patient approach that pays off handsomely. None of these young women play themselves – each uses a fictional name. But the nuances in slang dialogue  (_la mif_ is a quasi-reversal of _famille_), in rough-hewn attire – spiky, lovelorn Alison (Amélie Tonsi) sports socks with an ‘I Don’t Give a F***’ logo – or in the hair-trigger physicality of combative Brazilian Novinha (Kassia Da Costa), ground us in the veracity of the world depicted.

The film doesn’t shy away from its residents’ more problematic behaviour. And given that the spectre of sexual abuse by adults haunts several of the girls, it shows up the inadequacies of the care system’s handling of cause and effect. Ultimately, though, this is no mere hand-wringing exercise but an ebullient, creative, often very funny and tender slice of life. Baillif’s elegant linking of his raw vignettes by excerpts from Bach and Mozart points towards an emphasis on drama as much as documentary, invested as much in its vibrant young performances as in its indignant exposé of social care.  
**Leigh Singer, _Sight and Sound_, March 2022**
<br><br>

**LA MIF (THE FAM)**  
_Director_: Fred Baillif  
©: Freshprod  
_Production Company_: Freshprod  
_In association with_: Luna Films  
_In co-production with the_: RTS  
_With the participation of_: Cinéforom  
_and the support of the_: Loterie Romande, Freestudios – Genève  
_Presented by_: Freshprod  
_Producer_: Fred Baillif  
_Screenplay_: Fred Baillif  
_in collaboration with_: Stéphane Mitchell  
_Director of Photography_: Joseph Areddy  
_Editor_: Fred Baillif  
_Art Director_: Mary Villars  
_Costume Designer_: Lucy Mann

**Cast**  
Claudia Grob _(Lora)_  
Anaïs Uldry _(Audrey)_  
Kassia Da Costa _(Novinha)_  
Joyce Esther Ndayisenga _(Précieuse)_  
Charlie Areddy _(Justine)_  
Amélie Tonsi _(Alison)_  
Amandine Golay _(Caroline)_  
Sara Tulu _(Tamra)_  
Frédéric Landenberg _(Sébastien)_  
Merlin Landenberg _(Charles)_  
Blaise Granget _(François)_

Switzerland 2021©  
110 mins

A BFI release
<br><br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**A Tribute to Roger Michell: Preview:  The Duke + Q&A with actor Jim Broadbent and producer Nicky Latham**<br>
Thu 24 Feb 18:00<br>
**BFI Expanded: World Premiere: UNIQUE**<br>
Fri 25 Feb 19:00 and 20:30<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera Preview: Ali & Ava + Q&A with writer-director Clio Barnard**<br>
Mon 28 Feb 20:20<br>
**Preview: Rebel Dread + Q&A with Don Letts**<br>
Thu 3 Mar 18:00<br>
**Doctor Who: Revelation of the Daleks**<br>
Sat 5 Mar 12:00<br> 
**Mark Kermode Live in 3D at the BFI**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 18:10<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera Preview: True Things + Q&A with Director Harry Wootliff**<br>
Mon 7 Mar 20:35<br> 
**TV Preview: Gentleman Jack Series 2 + Q&A with writer Sally Wainwright and actors Suranne Jones and Sophie Rundle**<br>
Wed 9 Mar 18:10<br> 
**TV Preview: Inside No. 9 + Q&A with creators Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton, and executive producer Adam Tandy**<br>
Fri 11 Mar 20:40<br> 


**REGULAR PROGRAMME**<br>
**BFI Future Film Festival**<br>
17-20 Feb<br>
**Seniors’ Free Matinee: The Night of the Hunter  + intro by BFI programmer David Somerset**<br>
Mon 21 Feb 14:00<br>
**Member Picks:  Close Encounters of the Third Kind**<br>
Wed 23 Feb 17:50<br>
**Terror Vision: The People under the Stairs**<br>
Thu 24 Feb 20:40<br>
**Relaxed Screening:  Keep the Change + discussion**<br>
Mon 28 Feb 20:10<br>
**Projecting the Archive: A Question of Adultery + intro by BFI Curator Josephine Botting**<br>
Tue 1 Mar 18:20<br> 
**Member Picks: Evita**<br>
Fri 4 Mar 17:50<br> 
**African Odysseys: From the Caribbean to West Africa: Edric Connor’s Travelogues**<br>
Sun 6 Mar 14:00-16:30<br> 
**Silent Cinema: The Joker (Jokeren) + intro by BFI Curator Bryony Dixon**<br>
Sun 6 Mar 15:00<br> 
**Experimenta: Ticket of No Return + pre-recorded intro remembering Tabea Blumenschein with Ulrike Ottinger**<br>
Tue 8 Mar 18:00<br> 
**Film Wallahs: The Beatles and India + intro by co-director Pete Compton and producer Reynold D’Silva**<br>
Thu 10 Mar 18:15<br> 
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.<br> 
See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk/)

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTE2NTY2NjE3MF19
-->
