---
layout: post
title: She Said
published: true
date: 2022-11-24
readtime: true
categories: ['PREVIEW']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'USA 2022, 128 mins<br> Director: Maria Schrader'
pdf: '2022-11-24-she-said.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with screenwriter Rebecca Lenkiewicz_

Two-time Academy Award® nominee Carey Mulligan (_Promising Young Woman, An Education_) and Emmy nominee Zoe Kazan (_The Plot Against America, The Big Sick_) star as _New York Times_ reporters Megan Twohey and Jodi Kantor, who together broke one of the most important stories in a generation – a story that shattered decades of silence around the subject of sexual assault in Hollywood and impelled a shift in American culture that continues to this day.

From the Academy Award® winning producers of _12 Years a Slave, Moonlight, Minari, Selma_ and _The Big Short_ and the Oscar®-nominated producer of _Zero Dark Thirty_ and _American Hustle_, the film is based on the _New York Times_ investigation by Jodi Kantor, Megan Twohey and Rebecca Corbett and the _New York Times_ bestseller, _She Said: Breaking the Sexual Harassment Story That Helped Ignite a Movement_ by Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey.

A testament to the incalculable importance of investigative journalism, _She Said_ details the journey of reporters and editors engaged in the unrelenting pursuit of the truth and highlights the courage of survivors and witnesses who chose to come forward to stop an accused serial predator from committing further harm. Together, their commitment and fortitude sparked a global conversation, helped propel the #MeToo movement, and fuelled a reckoning of the system that had enabled him.

At its heart, _She Said_ is an inspiring true story about people, many of them women, many of them mothers, who summoned the courage to speak out and seek justice, not just for themselves but for those in the future, both in the U.S. and around the globe. The film is a compelling, moving reminder of the power of individual people, armed with determination and grit, to, together, change the world.

The film co-stars Oscar® nominee Patricia Clarkson (_Shutter Island, Pieces of April_), Emmy winner Andre Braugher (_Homicide: Life on the Street, Thief_), Tony winner Jennifer Ehle (_Zero Dark Thirty, Pride and Prejudice_), with Academy Award® nominee Samantha Morton (_Minority Report, In America_) and Emmy and Golden Globe nominee Ashley Judd (_Double Jeopardy, Bug_) as herself.

_She Said_ is directed by Emmy winner Maria Schrader (_I’m Your Man, Unorthodox_ limited series) from a screenplay by Rebecca Lenkiewicz, screenwriter of the Oscar® winning film _Ida_. The film is produced by Academy Award® winners Dede Gardner and Jeremy Kleiner for Plan B Entertainment and is executive produced by Oscar® winner Brad Pitt and Lila Yacoub and by Oscar® nominee Megan Ellison and Sue Naegle for Annapurna Pictures.  
**Production notes**

In a luxury suite, a robe is discarded on a bed; a pair of cheap white plimsolls lie discarded on a plush carpet. In voiceover, women describe their experiences of sexual harassment, assault and rape in encounters with film producer Harvey Weinstein. Sometimes faltering, mediated by phone, or telling a story they have tried to tell many times before, women’s voices are clear: this is the truth, and something must change.

An adaptation of journalists Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey’s account of their investigation into Weinstein for the _New York Times_, _She Said_ is a bold and vital film. Early on, _Times_ editor Rebecca Corbett (Patricia Clarkson) asks why sexual violence is ‘so hard to address’; the film sets out to answer that question, evoking the claustrophobic conspiracy of the systems of power – and the journalists, film professionals, lawyers and accountants who uphold them – that silence survivors.

That it does so by centring women’s experiences is an extraordinary achievement. Natasha Braier’s cinematography is intimate when women recall trauma, but never invasive. Many of the survivors mentioned in the film do not appear onscreen at all. Rather, we watch Kantor and Twohey as they listen to women speaking, which provides the leads with scope for delicate performances. Where Kazan is hopeful and just the right amount of naïve as Jodi (‘What do you mean, I’m not intimidating?’ she asks her colleague in a rare moment of humour), Carey Mulligan is self-assured and cynical as Megan. Alongside dialogue and voiceover, _She Said_ maximises the dramatic possibilities of mundane sonic elements, with phones vibrating in the night, and text messages asserting a sudden ‘ping’ to curtail the anxious crescendo of the score.

Some women, including actress Ashley Judd, appear as themselves; in one chilling scene, as a disembodied camera advances eerily down an empty hotel corridor, we hear Ambra Battilana Gutierrez’s covert recording of an encounter with Weinstein on the sound track. Blending dramatic and documentary elements, in a film about believing women, risks creating tension between fiction and truth, but in _She Said_ it just about works to bolster the film’s authenticity. An underlying narrative about self-sacrifice is less successful, though. As Kantor and Twohey struggle to separate work from home, their daughters become proxies for all the would-be survivors they want to keep safe from harm. Twohey encouraging survivors to speak out so that ‘together we can […] protect women in the future’ warrants at least some interrogation: it’s a proposition that burdens survivors with going public with their trauma to fix a world they did not break.

But _She Said_ remains a call to arms in the struggle against patriarchy, and suggests that both journalism and cinema make a difference to our lives.  For as the camera lingers on the dreadful scenes of an abuser’s hotel room, women’s voices fill the space he once inhabited. Survivors become bigger, louder, and more powerful, with their own enduring cinematic legacy.  
**Rebecca Harrison, _Sight and Sound_, bfi.org.uk/sight-and-sound, 17 October 2022**
<br><br>

**SHE SAID**<br>
_Directed by:_ Maria Schrader<br>
_an_ Annapurna/Plan B _production_<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Brad Pitt, Lila Yacoub,  Megan Ellison, Sue Naegle<br>
_Produced by:_ Dede Gardner, Jeremy Kleiner,  Lexi Barta<br>
_Casting:_ Francine Maisler<br>
_Screenplay by:_ Rebecca Lenkiewicz<br>
_Based on the New York Times investigation by:_ Jodi Kantor, Megan Twohey, Rebecca Corbett<br>
_Based on the book_ She Said: Breaking the Sexual Harassment Story That Helped Ignite a Movement _by:_ Jodi Kantor, Megan Twohey<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Natasha Braier<br>
_Editor:_ Hansjörg Weißbrich<br>
_Production Designer:_ Meredith Lippincott<br>
_Music:_ Nicholas Britell<br>

**Cast**<br>
Carey Mulligan _(Megan Twohey)_<br>
Zoe Kazan _(Jodi Kantor)_<br>
Patricia Clarkson _(Rebecca Corbett)_<br>
Andre Braugher _(Dean Baquet)_<br>
Jennifer Ehle _(Laura Madden)_<br>
Samantha Morton _(Zelda Perkins)_<br>

USA 2022<br>
128 mins

Courtesy of Universal Pictures International<br>
<br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Preview: The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse + Q&A with directors Peter Baynton and Charlie Mackesy and producer Cara Speller**<br>
Fri 2 Dec 18:15<br>
**Missing Believed Wiped Session 1:  World Preview Lost and Found:  
Spike Milligan: The Unseen Archive + intro**<br>
Sat 3 Dec 11:45<br>
**Missing Believed Wiped Session 2:  oddities and rarities**<br>
Sat 3 Dec 14:20<br>
**Preview: Tori and Lokita + Q&A with director-screenwriters Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne**<br>
Sat 3 Dec 17:45<br>
**Mark Kermode Live in 3D at the BFI**<br>
Mon 5 Dec 18:30<br>
**Preview: Enys Men + Q&A with director  Mark Jenkin**<br>
Mon 5 Dec 20:45<br>
**TV Preview: Happy Valley Final Series Episode 1 + Q&A with Sally Wainwright, James Norton & Siobhan Finneran**<br>
Tue 6 Dec 18:15<br>
**Book Launch Event: The Shining  (Extended Version) + Q&A with Lee Unkrich**<br>
Thu 8 Dec 18:40<br>
**Peter Greenaway in Conversation**<br>
Fri 9 Dec 18:20<br>
**The Precious Things:  BBC Centenary Special + intro**<br>
Sat 10 Dec 14:20<br>
**TV Preview: His Dark Materials + intro with  cast and crew**<br>
Tue 13 Dec 18:00 BFI IMAX<br>
**TV Preview: Ghosts Christmas Special + Q&A with cast and crew**<br>
Thu 15 Dec 18:20<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwMTEwNzMxMzNdfQ==
-->
