---
layout: post
title: Hoffman
published: true
date: 2022-01-13
readtime: true
categories: ['PROJECTING THE ARCHIVE']
tags: [Comedy]
metadata: 'UK 1969, 112 mins<br> Director: Alvin Rakoff'
pdf: '2022-01-13-hoffman.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

_+ intro by director Alvin Rakoff_<br>
A young secretary (Cusack) is blackmailed into spending a week at the flat of one of her bosses, who has uncovered her fiancé’s criminal activity. Sellers was ideal casting for Benjamin Hoffman, and gives his customary immersive performance, while Cusack – headlining for the first time – holds her own in a difficult role. The dynamic between them occasionally makes for uncomfortable viewing but Cusack is confident and uncompromising, and Sellers’ sinister touches give way to a more tender approach. Originally a TV play, this two-hander is saved from claustrophobia by John Blezard’s striking design of Hoffman’s pad, around which director Rakoff skilfully guides his actors.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

_Hoffman_ is a film without much of a reputation, which is a shame because it contains one of Sellers’ most interesting performances. Famously, he considered the end result to be too revealing of his own personality and offered to buy back the negative from EMI. This in itself is fascinating because Hoffman is a troubled, dark character, a man who becomes obsessed with the woman he imprisons in his flat for a weekend for the purposes of blackmail. It’s a complex and enlightening turn, with Sellers appearing gaunt and grim, spitting out misogyny and simmering with suppressed rage. The film falls apart after the first half and never becomes the battle of wills that it promises to be – no reflection on Sinéad Cusack’s excellent performance – but it’s full of interesting things. It shows a demon inside Sellers which we now know to have been ever-present in his life and it’s not comfortable to watch.<br>
**Mike Sutton, bfi.org.uk, 8 September 2016**<br>

**HOFFMAN**  
_Directed by_: Alvin Rakoff  
_©_: Longstone Film Productions  
_Production Company_: Associated British Pathé  
_Produced by_: Ben Arbeid  
_Production Supervisor_: Bruce Sharman  
_Assistant Director_: Jake Wright  
_Continuity_: Doreen Dearnaley  
_Screenplay by_: Ernest Gébler  
_Based upon his own novel_: Ernest Gébler  
_Director of Photography_: Gerry Turpin  
_Camera Operator_: Michael Sarafian  
_Chief Electrician_: Sid Wainwright  
_Editor_: Barrie Vince  
_Art Director_: John Blezard  
_Construction Manager_: Ron Coleman  
_Wardrobe_: Elizabeth Adamson  
_Make-up_: Harry Frampton  
_Hairdresser_: Pat McDermott  
_Colour by_: Technicolor  
_Music by_: Ron Grainer  
_Sound Recordist_: Claude Hitchcock  
_Dubbing Mixer_: Len Abbott  
_Sound Editor_: Ian Fuller  
_Studio_: Associated British Elstree Studios  

_uncredited_<br>
_Production Secretary_: Van Jones  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Michael Harvey  
_Focus Puller_: Eddie Collins  
_Clapper Loader_: Keith Brown  
_Stills_: Joe Pearce<br>
_Assistant Editor_: Joseph Despins  
_2nd Assistant Editor_: Alistair Fryer  
_Assistant Art Director_: Tony Reading  
_Draughtsman_: Terry Ackland-Snow  
_Assistant Make-up_: Peter Frampton<br>
_Sound Supervisor_: A.W. Lumkin  
_Sound Camera Operator_: Gordon Beavis  
_Boom Operator_: John Hall  
_Maintenance Engineer_: Dan Grimmel  
_Assistant Dubbing Mixers_: Eddie Haben,  C. Anderson  
_Assistant Sound Editor_: Len Tremble  
_Publicity_: Ruth Phillips<br>

**Cast**<br>
Peter Sellers _(Mr Benjamin Hoffman)_  
Sinéad Cusack _(Janet Smith)_  
Jeremy Bulloch _(Tom Mitchell)_  
Ruth Dunning _(Mrs Mitchell)_  
David Lodge _(foreman builder)_<br>

UK 1969<br>
112 mins<br>
<br>

**REGULAR PROGRAMME**<br>
**Member Picks: The Killing Fields**<br>
Wed 19 Jan 17:50<br>
**Art in the Making: Sacred Geometry + Q&A with artist Leila Dear**<br>
Thu 20 Jan 18:10<br>
**Seniors’ Free Matinee: HG Wells’ The Man Who Could Work Miracles + intro**<br>
Mon 24 Jan 14:00<br>
**Chinese New Year: An Autumn Tale + intro**<br>
Tue 25 Jan 20:15<br>
**Experimenta: The Surviving Films of Franciszka and Stefan Themerson + intro**<br>
Thu 27 Jan 18:10<br>
**Terror Vision: My Little Eye + intro by Mike Muncer, host of The Evolution of Horror podcast**<br>
Thu 27 Jan 20:30<br>
**Relaxed Screening: L’Enfant sauvage (The Wild Child) + intro and discussion**<br>
Mon 31 Jan 18:10<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop. We’re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
