---
layout: post
title: Madame de...
published: true
date: 2023-01-04
readtime: true
categories: ['SIGHT AND SOUND GREATEST FILMS OF ALL TIME 2022<br>90=']
tags: [Drama, Period]
metadata: 'France/Italy 1953, 100 mins<br> Director: Max Ophuls'
pdf: '2023-01-04-madame-de.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Opulence exudes from every frame of this tale of adultery and deception, sparked by the debt-induced sale of earrings in 19th-century Paris. Ophuls’ sweeping camera dances with the characters in a world of illicit meetings, loaded glances and double entendre. But there is tragedy lurking beneath each slow dissolve and tightly cinched corset – the perfect example of style reflecting substance.  
**Ruby McGuigan, bfi.org.uk**  

_Madame de…_ is almost completely studio-bound, the story for the most part acted out within elaborate interiors. Shooting began on 8 April 1953 in the Studios de Boulogne on the Seine. The story was based on a novel by Louise de Vilmorin about a pair of earrings causing a woman’s downfall. Georges Annenkov, the costume designer, recalled Ophuls telling him that the jewels were the only thing which really interested him. They provided the axis around which the action constantly turned, like a carousel. A small accessory of a woman’s wardrobe which imposes its presence, and comes to dominate the destinies of the characters, leading them finally to their tragic end.

The story hangs heavily on coincidence and chance, but by this device, Ophuls emphasises the small world of privilege, the gilded cage. There are nineteen transfers of the jewels, and each exchange adds depth and builds another layer of symbolic significance. Ophuls’ style is one of rich visual impact, honed to perfection with his team of close collaborators, including Annenkov, photographer Christian Matras and art director Jean d’Eaubonne. And _Madame de..._ is one of their polished essays about the dominance of objects; the decor, material surroundings and accessories of the characters forming the narrative drive and becoming the _raison d’être_ of the story.

The film begins with a long tracking shot devoted to careful exploration of Louise’s boudoir. In an extraordinary single-take, a woman is introduced through her possessions. All that is seen of her is a gloved hand searching through jewels, furs and dresses as she ponders what to sell. She knocks a bible to the floor, regrets aloud the absence of her mother, and finally settles on the earrings her husband gave her, on the grounds that ‘I can do with them as I please.’ She holds them up, and only then is her face glimpsed framed, or rather imprisoned, within an ornate mirror.

_Madame de..._ is about questions of social status. Ophuls chose to place Vilmorin’s contemporary story within the _fin de siècle_ period, because society at that time still conformed to a set of rules, a code of honour. A society in which every social position was still clearly defined and interconnected, but was on the brink of upheaval. A perennial theme in Ophuls’ work was glittering, decadent societies in decline, and his camera relentlessly pursues elegant creatures up and down palatial staircases; momentarily frames them against pillars or views them through windows, through mists of lace, or just catches their reflection in ornamental mirrors.

The restless movement betrays the transience of this _belle époque_, the fleeting nature of pleasure and happiness and the pain beneath the surface gaiety and glamour. The monochrome look of the film emphasises both the elegance and the determinedly old-fashioned nature of this world. It is rococo rather than Art Nouveau. Bernhardt is mentioned as a new phenomenon and then dismissed. A society which clings to the past, to a rose-tinted view of the _ancien régime_, deeply suspicious of the present, let alone the future.

_Madame de…_ portrays the _beau monde_, the respectable world of married society where flirtation is an accepted game, but passion is not. A world which still holds the view that if a wife does not abide by the social code, she will pay the price, however beautiful, admired and seemingly secure in her position. A brilliant society that functions to music – at balls, the opera, smart restaurants and soirées – and the illicit love between Donati and Louise (Vittorio De Sica and Danielle Darrieux) develops through a series of repeated gallantries exchanged through a continuous waltz.

They begin to dance, the camera tracking them round the floor. There is a dissolve and they are dancing at another ball, then another and another. Their costumes change, but they turn ceaselessly, past pillars, paintings, sculpture, fountains, displays of ferns and palms, by tall draped windows, beneath massive chandeliers... the room gradually empties, the full orchestra dwindles to a quartet. It gets later. At the end, they dance alone, in their overcoats and gloves, to a single piano. A footman walks around extinguishing the lights and the scene ends in total eclipse.

In this stylised sequence; a journey is taken from frivolity to solemnity, from extravagance to simplicity, from light to dark. In fact, the whole film marks a journey away from gaiety, from the lavish boudoir to the austere church where the earrings eventually rest. The transience of this society, and the passion blossoming briefly within it, is most aptly demonstrated in a particularly breath-taking example of Ophuls’ technique, in which the torn pieces of Louise’s love letter from Donati turn into falling snowflakes. Nothing is permanent; these beautiful creatures are victims of chance, fate and the passage of time.  
**Caroline Dunant, _Sight and Sound_, Winter 1990-91**  

**MADAME DE…**  
_Director_: Max Ophuls  
_Production Companies_: Franco London Film (Paris), Indusfilm, Rizzoli Editore  
_Unit Production Manager_: André Hoss  
_Production Managers_: H. Baum, R. Baum  
_1st Assistant Directors_: Marc Maurette, Willy Picard  
_Script Supervisor_: Francine Corteggiani  
_Screen Adaptation by_: Marcel Achard, Max Ophuls, Annette Wademant  
_Dialogue_: Marcel Achard  
_Based on the novel by_: Louise de Vilmorin  
_Director of Photography_: Christian Matras  
_Camera Operator_: Alain Douarinou  
_Art Director_: A.J. D’Eaubonne  
_Set Decorator_: Maurice Barnathan  
_Costumes_: Georges Annenkov, Rosine Delamare  
_Wardrobe_: Georgette Fillon  
_Make-up Supervisor_: Carmen Brel  
_Music_: Oscar Straus, Georges Van Parys  
_Sound_: Antoine Petitjean  
_Studio_: Studios de Boulogne  
_uncredited_  
_Producer_: Henry Deutschmeister  
_Assistant Unit Manager_: Jean Pieuchot  
_Production Administrator_: Fritz Kretschmer  
_Location Manager_: Charles Chieusse  
_Production Secretary_: Simone Bouvet  
_Technical Collaborator_: René Moulin  
_Technician_: Henri Chenu  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Tony Aboyantz  
_Trainee Assistant Director_: Alain Jessua  
_Camera Assistants_: Ernest Bourreaud, Henri Champion  
_Stills_: Raymond Voinquel  
_Portrait Stills_: Sam Levin  
_Special Effects_: François Sune  
_Editor_: Boris Lewin  
_Assistant Editor_: Laure Cassau  
_Assistant Art Directors_: Jacques Gut, Marc Frédérix  
_Set Dresser_: Robert Christidès  
_Props_: Louis Boussaroque, Albert Arnou  
_Tapestries_: Maurice Bourbotte  
_Costumers_: Mado Chaucha, Josette Laurier, Lucienne Magot  
_Make-up Assistant_: Janine Cassé  
_Hairdresser_: Jean Lalaurette  
_Wigs_: Jules Chanteau  
_Musical Themes_: Giacomo Meyerbeer  
_Lyrics_: Louis Ducreux  
_Sound Technician_: Fernand Janisse  
_Boom Operator_: Gaston Ancessi  
_Publicity_: Georges Cravenne  

**Cast**  
Charles Boyer _(General André de...)_  
Danielle Darrieux _(Countess Louise de...)_  
Vittorio De Sica _(Baron Fabrizio Donati)_  
Jean Debucourt _(M Rémy, the jeweller)_  
Jean Galland _(M de Bernac)_  
Mireille Perrey _(Louise’s maid)_  
Paul Azaïs _(first coachman)_  
Josselin  
Hubert Noël _(Henri de Malleville)_  
Lia Di Leo _(Lola, André’s mistress)_  
_uncredited_  
Serge Lecointe _(Jérôme Rémy, the jeweller’s son)_  
Jean Degrave _(club patron)_  
Madeleine Barbulée _(Louise’s friend)_  
Georges Vitray _(old journalist)_  
Léon Walther _(theatre manager)_  
Guy Favières _(Julien, André’s servant)_  
Jean Toulout _(ambassador)_  
Germaine Stainval _(ambassador’s wife)_  
Jacques Beauvais _(majordomo)_  
Robert Moor _(diplomat)_  
Claire Duhamel _(maid)_  
Emile Genevois _(guard)_  
Colette Régis _(candle seller)_  
Albert Michel _(second coachman)_  
Georges Paulais _(first duel second)_  
Michel Salina _(second duel second)_  
Gérard Buhr _(customs officer)_  
Léon Pauléon _(doorman)_  
Roger Vincent  
Charles Bayard  
René Worms  
Max Mégy  

France/Italy 1953  
100 mins  


**SIGHT AND SOUND GREATEST FILMS OF ALL TIME 2022**  
**The General**  
Sun 1 Jan 12:10; Sun 29 Jan 15:10  
**The Leopard (Il gattopardo)**  
Sun 1 Jan 14:10; Thu 5 Jan 18:40; Fri 20 Jan 14:00  
**Sunset Boulevard**  
Sun 1 Jan 15:50; Fri 27 Jan 14:30; Mon 30 Jan 17:50  
**Metropolis**  
Sun 1 Jan 17:55 (+ intro by Bryony Dixon, BFI Curator); Sun 15 Jan 14:40; Mon 30 Jan 16:30 BFI IMAX  
**L’avventura (The Adventure)**  
Sun 1 Jan 18:05; Sun 22 Jan 15:20; Mon 30 Jan 20:15  
**Touki-Bouki**  
Mon 2 Jan 13:40; Tue 31 Jan 17:40  
**The Red Shoes**  
Mon 2 Jan 13:50; Tue 24 Jan 18:05  
**Once Upon a Time in the West (C’era una volta il West)**  
Mon 2 Jan 15:20; Sat 7 Jan 17:15; Sun 15 Jan 16:15 BFI IMAX  
**Get Out**  
Mon 2 Jan 18:40; Fri 6 Jan 17:50  
**Pierrot le Fou**  
Tue 3 Jan 18:10; Wed 4 Jan 20:30; Thu 19 Jan 20:30  
**My Neighbour Totoro (Tonari no Totoro)**  
Tue 3 Jan 18:20; Sun 22 Jan 10:00 BFI IMAX; Sat 28 Jan 13:40  
**A Man Escaped (Un Condamné à mort s’est échappé)**  
Tue 3 Jan 18:30; Sat 28 Jan 20:30  
**Black Girl (La Noire de...)**  
Tue 3 Jan 20:30; Thu 12 Jan 18:15 (+ intro)  
**Ugetsu Monogatari**  
Tue 3 Jan 20:50; Tue 17 Jan 20:30  
**Madame de...**  
Wed 4 Jan 14:30; Fri 20 Jan 18:10 (+ intro by Ruby McGuigan, Cultural Programme Manager)  
**Yi Yi (A One and a Two…)**  
Wed 4 Jan 18:40; Sun 22 Jan 14:00 (+ intro by Hyun Jin Cho, Film Programmer, BFI Festivals)  
**The Shining**  
Fri 6 Jan 20:10; Tue 10 Jan 20:10; Sat 21 Jan 20:30 BFI IMAX  
**Spirited Away (Sen to Chihiro no Kamikakushi)**  
Sat 7 Jan 12:10; Sun 22 Jan 12:30 BFI IMAX  
**Tropical Malady (Sud pralad)**  
Sat 7 Jan 13:50; Mon 9 Jan 20:40  
**Histoire(s) du cinema**  
Sat 7 Jan 16:30  
**Blue Velvet**  
Sat 7 Jan 20:30; Fri 20 Jan 20:35; Tue 24 Jan 21:00 BFI IMAX  
**Sátántangó**  
Sun 8 Jan 11:15; Sat 21 Jan 13:30  
**Celine and Julie Go Boating (Céline et Julie vont en bateau)**   
Sun 8 Jan 14:45; Sat 21 Jan 17:00  
**Journey to Italy (Viaggio in Italia)**  
Sun 8 Jan 18:20; Mon 23 Jan 14:30; Fri 27 Jan 20:50  
**Parasite (Gisaengchung)**  
Mon 9 Jan 17:50; Wed 18 Jan 17:30 BFI IMAX  
**The Gleaners and I (Les glaneurs et la glaneuse) + La Jetée**  
Wed 11 Jan 20:30; Mon 23 Jan 18:10  
**A Matter of Life and Death**  
Thu 12 Jan 20:40; Sun 22 Jan 11:30  
**Chungking Express (Chung Him sam lam)**  
Thu 12 Jan 20:45; Tue 17 Jan 20:50; Sat 21 Jan 14:15  
**Modern Times**  
Fri 13 Jan 17:45; Sun 22 Jan 13:10  
**A Brighter Summer Day (Guling jie shaonian sha ren shijian)**  
Mon 16 Jan 18:30; Sat 28 Jan 16:00  
**Imitation of Life**  
Wed 18 Jan 20:30; Wed 25 Jan 14:30; Sun 29 Jan 12:30  
**The Spirit of the Beehive (El espíritu de la colmena)**  
Thu 19 Jan 18:00; Sat 28 Jan 13:50  
**Sansho the Bailiff (Sansho Dayu)**  
Fri 20 Jan 17:45; Thu 26 Jan 17:50  
**Andrei Rublev**  
Thu 26 Jan 18:40; Sun 29 Jan 17:20  
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjA0ODkxNzk1Ml19
-->
