---
layout: post
title: EO
published: true
date: 2023-02-03
readtime: true
categories: ['NEW RELEASES']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'Poland/Italy 2022, 88 mins<br> Director: Jerzy Skolimowski'
pdf: '2023-02-03-eo.pdf'
---

_Please note that this film contains a sequence of flashing lights which might affect customers who are susceptible to photosensitive epilepsy_.

Receiving its British premiere at the 2022 BFI London Film Festival and joint winner of the Cannes Jury Prize, Jerzy Skolimowski’s _EO_ is a vividly realised homage to Robert Bresson’s _Au hasard Balthazar_ and an original work in its own right. On its journey through life, a donkey with melancholic eyes and a fondness for carrots experiences joy and pain, with the wheel of fortune randomly turning his luck into disaster and his despair into unexpected bliss. The latest collaboration between Polish director Skolimowski (_The Shout_) and his veteran producer Jeremy Thomas, _EO_ is a distinctive and ultimately poignant work. Brilliantly shot by Michal Dymek and featuring immersive sound design, the drama ponders the follies of humanity while never resorting to sermonising. Interspersed with moments of bracing surrealism, _EO_ reminds us not only of the need for humility, but also of Skolimowski’s immense contribution to world cinema.  
**Jason Wood, BFI Executive Director of Public Programme and Audiences**  

An 86-minute spin-dryer of sound and image, _EO_ is an animal rights rallying cry, a bizarre donkey’s-eye-view art film, and one other thing: a loose retelling of Robert Bresson’s 1966 masterpiece _Au hasard Balthasar_. Even for elderly Polish auteur Jerzy Skolimowski, responsible for the stylishly zoned-out, subversive _Deep End_ (1970) and a handful of other innovative films over the intervening years, that’s a tall order. _Au hasard Balthasar_ was a film that Jean Luc-Godard once described as ‘containing the world in an hour and a half’.

Yet right from the opening frames of _EO_ we understand this is not an attempt to restage Bresson’s religious allegory of human cruelty and salvation. It opens with strobing red lights over a staged circus performance, one where a young woman (Sandra Dryzmalska) stands over a donkey on its back. With its four hooves in the air, she pretends to resurrect it as it jumps to its feet on cue. It’s an immediate distinction from the stark, clean simplicity of Bresson’s work, and perhaps all the better for it: Skolimowski’s free-floating camera, red filters and abrupt perspective switches all suggest a bold aesthetic of its own making rather than a likely ill-fated attempt to mimic a classic.

What _EO_ shares with _Balthasar_ are the most basic parts of its DNA: the story of a humble donkey who is separated from a young woman who dotes on him, unwillingly sent on an odyssey from owner to owner, facility to farm, kindness to savagery. We soon learn that EO – a soft-muzzled grey circus donkey – was actually rather content and protected by his handler.

His journey begins when he is forced into relocation after animal-rights activists picket the circus. (The egotism of the well-intentioned is a frequent theme here: even the humans who mean well are too alienated from the natural world to truly protect it.) The mule gets lost – or runs away – from the farm he is taken to, showing real agency when he wishes to escape; he wanders the woods at night in a surreal, fairy-tale-like sequence. The film switches to EO’s own perspective at points as he watches lonely frogs leap through trickling streams, his affinity for his fellow animals shown in sharp relief to smoke-billowing power plants, ugly industrialism and busy highways encroaching on the natural world. From lonely country roads to city streets, football pitches to the Italian countryside, EO’s long journey across Europe reveals the rotten heart of its modernity, contrasted with the tender innocence of this animal.

The camerawork sometimes seems to be omniscient as it flips upside down, snakes over mountains and rivers and dwarfs its sweet little mule against the roaring power of man-made dams or hunting-rifle lasers. Cockeyed, beautiful and sensitive even in its depiction of occasional animal cruelty, it has a cumulative effect that borders on the hypnotic. Its one visual homage to Bresson occurs in tight close-up on EO’s large, liquid brown eyes, an effect that remains as haunting as ever.

This is a film which concerns itself with nebulous and wide-reaching subjects, never exactly didactic but also never unclear about its aims as a dressing-down of European greed and indifference to suffering. Through its various episodes, it highlights the exploitation of the weak and the innocent, from a Polish trucker attempting to sexually assault a starving migrant worker to the carnivorous, leather- and fur-wearing indifference of the various characters who drift into the story. In a heart-wrenching segment, EO meets hooligan football fans whose tribalism and violence nearly get him killed. But it is more often human myopia that does damage: we are a drain on the pastoral, natural world. And who can blame Skolimowski, at 84, for thinking so? EO himself is always on the side of his fellow occupants of a simpler, older world; at one point, he kicks a mink-farm worker square in the forehead. This can verge on the comic or even goofy – yet the visual experimentation and narrative unpredictability are constantly engaging.

Even for those of us who have the narrative of Bresson’s more spiritual film imprinted on our memories, _EO_ is never obvious about where it’s heading, maybe because its protagonist doesn’t know either. The film can be unwieldy, cartoonish and head-scratching. And yet it is bold in a way few contemporary films truly are, and its culmination of sound and image before the final cut to black is like a fist closing around your heart.  
**Christina Newland, _Sight and Sound_ (bfi.org.uk/sight-and-sound), 23 May 2022**  

**Jerzy Skolimowski on ‘EO’**  
Several decades ago, I said in an interview (I think it was _Cahiers du Cinéma_) that the only film that moved me to tears was [Bresson’s] _Au hasard Balthazar_ (1966). I think I discovered it shortly after its release. Since then, I haven’t shed a single tear at the cinema. Thus, what I owe to Robert Bresson is to have acquired the strong conviction that making an animal a character in the film is not only possible but can also be a source of emotion.

I wanted above all to make an emotional film, to base the narration on emotions, much more than in any of my previous films.

Directors use intellectual arguments and emotional language to provoke actors to deliver the desired effect. With my donkey, the only way to persuade him to do anything was with tenderness: words whispered in his ear and a few friendly caresses. Raising your voice, showing impatience or nervousness would have been the fastest path to disaster. Donkeys don’t know what ‘acting’ is, they can’t pretend anything – they simply ARE. They are gentle, caring, respectful, polite, and loyal. They live to the fullest in the present moment. They never show narcissism. They do not skimp on the supposed intentions of their character; and never discuss their director’s vision. They are excellent actors.

When the breeder showed me the photos of the available donkeys, I immediately liked those of the Sardinian breed. I knew EO must be grey with white spots around the eyes. I went to a stable near Warsaw to visit the animal that had seduced me the most in the photos. His name was Tako. As soon as I saw him, I knew he was going to be the star of my movie.

A second casting was then carried out to find him the best possible doubles. We used 6 donkeys in total: Tako, Hola, Marietta, Ettore, Rocco and Mela.  
**Production notes**  

**EO**  
_Directed by_: Jerzy Skolimowski  
_©_: Skopia Film, Alien Films, Warmia-Masuria Film Fund/Centre for Education and Cultural Initiatives in Olsztyn, Podkarpackie Regional Film Fund, Strefa Kultury Wrocław, Polwell, Moderator Inwestycje, Veilo A  
_A_ Skopia Film _production_  
_Co-produced by_: Alien Films Srl  
_In co-production with_: Polwell Sp. z o.o.  
_Production Companies_: Moderator Inwestycje Sp. z o.o., Veilo Ewa Żyłka, Podkarpackie Film Commission  
_Co-produced by_: Wojewódzki Dom Kultury w Rzeszowie, Podkarpackie Regional Film Fund  
_Funded by_ : Podkarpackie Region and the City of Rzeszów  
_Realised with the support of_ : Regione Lazio - Fondo regionale per il cinema e l’audiovisivo  
_In association with_: Ares  
_A_ Polish Film Institute _co-financed production Executive Producer_: Jeremy Thomas  
_Produced by_: Eva Piaskowska, Jerzy Skolimowski  
_Script Supervisors_: Renata Gałuszka, Barbara Omyła  
_Casting Director_: Paulina Krajnik  
_Casting Director Italy_: Jorgelina Pochintesta  
_Screenplay by_: Eva Piaskowska, Jerzy Skolimowski  
_Director of Photography_: Michal Dymek  
_Additional Directors of Photography_: Pawel Edelman, Michał Englert  
_Stills_: Aneta Gębska, Filip Gebski, Łukasz Bąk  
_Edited by_: Agnieszka Glinska  
_Production Designer_: Miroslaw ‘Mietek’ Koncewicz  
_Production Designer Italy_: Katarzyna Lewinska  
_Set Decorators_: Robert Dyrcz, Kamila Grzybowska-Sosnowska  
_Make-up Artists_: Aleksandra Dutkiewicz, Weronika Zielińs  
_Music_: Pawel Mykietyn  
_Music Orchestra_: Sinfonia Varsovia  
_Music Supervisor_: Pawel Juzwuk  
_Sound Design_: Radoslaw Ochnio  
_Sound Mixers_: Marcin Matlak, Michal Walczyński  
_Sound Mixer Italy_: Azzurra Stirpe  
_Sound Mixer Sicily_: Michal Matlak  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Pawel Jazwiecki  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Tomasz Lewandowski  

**Cast**  
Sandra Drzymalska _(Kasandra)_  
Lorenzo Zurzolo _(Vito)_  
Mateusz Kosciukiewicz _(Mateo)_  
Isabelle Huppert _(countess)_  
Tako _(Eo)_  
Hola _(Eo)_  
Marietta _(Eo)_  
Ettore _(Eo)_  
Rocco _(Eo)_  
Mela _(Eo)_  
Tomasz Organek _(Ziom)_  
Lolita Chammah _(Dora)_  
Agata Sasinowska _(Kaja)_  
Anna Rokita _(Dorota)_  
Michal Przybysławski _(Zenek)_  
Gloria Iradukunda _(Zea)_  
Piotr Szaja _(stableman)_  
Aleksander Janiszewski _(bailiff)_  
Delfina Wilkońska _(animal rights activist)_  
Andrzej Szeremeta _(vet)_  
Wojciech Andrzejuk _(hooligan 1)_  
Mateusz Murański _(hooligan 2)_  
Marcin Drabicki _(Jan)_  
Maciej Stępniak _(Wasyl)_  
Fernando Junior Gomes da Silva _(assassin)_  
Krzysztof Karczmarz _(Dyspensa’s trainer)_  
Waldemar Barwinski _(vet II)_  
Saverio Fabbri _(animal trader)_  
Katarzyna Russ _(bartender)_  
Alert _(Dyspensa)_  

Poland/Italy 2022  
88 mins  

A BFI Release  
<br>
**NEW RELEASES**  
**Enys Men**  
Continues from Fri 13 Jan  
**EO**  
From Fri 3 Feb  
**Blue Jean**  
From Fri 10 Feb; Fri 10 Feb 18:10 (+ Q&A with director-screenwriter Georgia Oakley and producer Hélène Sifre)  
**Creature**  
From Fri 24 Feb; Fri 24 Feb 18:10 (+ intro and Q&A with director Asif Kapadia and other members of the filmmaking team)   
**Broker**  
From Fri 24 Feb  
<br>
**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjA0MjE5MjcwNSwtMjAzNjEzODA1Nl19
-->
