---
layout: post
title: Nolly
published: true
date: 2023-01-26
readtime: true
categories: ['TV PREVIEW']
tags: [Drama, Period]
metadata: 'UK 2022, 2x 45 mins<br> Director: Peter Hoar'
pdf: '2023-01-26-nolly.pdf'
---

_+ Q&A with writer Russell T Davies, cast Helena Bonham Carter, Mark Gatiss and Augustus Prew, exec producer Nicola Shindler and director Peter Hoar. Chaired by Boyd Hilton._

Academy Award-nominated and BAFTA-winning actor Helena Bonham Carter (_The Crown, Enola Holmes 1 and 2, The King’s Speech, Harry Potter, Burton and Taylor_) stars as Noele (or Nolly to her friends), who was a legend in her own lifetime. As flame-haired widow Meg Richardson in the long-running soap opera _Crossroads_, she was one of the most famous people in Britain. Then in 1981, at the height of the show’s success and the peak of Nolly’s fame, she was axed without ceremony, without warning and with no explanation. With the boss’s words ‘all good things must come to an end’ ringing in her ears, Noele Gordon found herself thrown out of the show that was her life for over 18 years.

_Nolly_ is a bold exploration of how the establishment turns on women who refuse to play by the rules, the women it cannot understand and the women it fears. And, it is a love letter to a legend of television, and to the madcap soap she starred in. _Nolly_ is an outrageously fun and wildly entertaining ride through Noele Gordon’s most tumultuous years, and a sharp, affectionate and heartbreaking portrait of a forgotten icon.

_Nolly_ begins streaming on ITVX from 2 February.

**About the panel**

**Russell T Davies** was awarded the 2006 Dennis Potter Award at BAFTA for his writing services to television and an OBE in the Queen’s 2008 Birthday Honours list for services to drama.

Russell was born in Swansea in 1963. A graduate of Oxford University, he completed the BBC Director’s course before becoming a TV producer. He started writing whilst working in the Manchester department of Children’s BBC. He has created several award-winning series including the ground-breaking _Queer as Folk_, _Bob and Rose_ for which he won the British Comedy Award for Writer of the Year and Best Comedy Drama, _The Second Coming_ for which he won the RTS Award for Best Network Drama and Broadcast Award’s Best Single Drama. He went on to revive the classic British science fiction series _Doctor Who_ which received numerous awards and for which Russell won the BAFTA for Best Drama Series, and _Torchwood_ for which he won the BAFTA Cymru for Best Drama Series. He created the trilogy _Cucumber_, _Banana_ and _Tofu_ for which he won the BAFTA for Best Drama Writer and BPG Innovation Award in 2016. He adapted _A Very English Scandal_ on BBC One for which he won the Rose d’Or Award for Best Limited Series and TV Movie and Broadcast News Award for Drama of the Year 2018. He wrote the 6-part drama _Years and Years_ for BBC One/HBO starring Emma Thompson and Anne Reid and more recently, he wrote the acclaimed 5-part series _It’s a Sin_ for Channel 4/HBO MAX which depicts the lives of a group of gay men and their friends who lived during the HIV/AIDS crisis in the UK, which has received numerous awards. He has recently taken over as showrunner on _Doctor Who_.

**Helena Bonham Carter** is currently filming feature film _One Life_ alongside Anthony Hopkins. She is a two-time Academy Award nominee: for her work in _The Wings of the Dove_ and for _The King’s Speech_, directed by Tom Hooper. She also garnered a Golden Globe nomination and won an Evening Standard British Film Award for Best Actress for her performance as Mrs Lovett in Tim Burton’s 2009 screen adaptation _Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street_. In 2014 she earned a SAG, BAFTA and Emmy nomination for her portrayal of Elizabeth Taylor in _Burton and Taylor_ for BBC4 and in 2012 was honoured with a CBE from Buckingham Palace. Other notable credits include _A Room with a View_, _Howards End_, _Fight Club_, the _Harry Potter_ franchise, _Ocean’s 8_ and _The Crown_, amongst many others.

**Mark Gatiss** has had a long and varied career as a writer, director and producer behind the camera, as well as being a critically-acclaimed actor and published author. His early success on television was as part of the comedy troupe _The League of Gentlemen_, for which he both wrote and appeared onscreen as various characters. He had a childhood passion for _Doctor Who_ and both wrote for and starred in the modern revival. He was also the writer and executive producer of _An Adventure in Space and Time_, a drama of the genesis of the series as part of the show’s 50th Anniversary celebrations  in 2013.

Mark is the co-creator and executive producer of _Sherlock_, the hit BBC series in which he also plays Sherlock’s brother Mycroft Holmes. The show has won a total of nine Emmys and twelve BAFTAs across its four series. Mark’s other writing credits for television include _Crooked House_ (2008), two episodes of Agatha Christie’s _Poirot_, his adaptation of HG Wells’ _The First Men in the Moon_ (2010), _Dracula_ (2019) and all three episodes of the documentary series _A History of Horror (_2010) and its one-off sequel _Horror Europa_ (2012), all of which he presented as well. He has also written and presented two BBC art documentaries – one on John Minton and the other on Aubrey Beardsley. Additionally, he has written and directed several short ghost stories for the BBC in recent years including _The Tractate Middoth_ (2013), _The Dead Room_ (2018), _Martin’s Close_ (2019), _The Mezzotint_ (2021) and _Count Magnus_ (2022). In 2017, he curated and directed _Queers_ – a series of eight monologues for BBC Four to mark the 50th Anniversary of the 1967 Sexual Offences Act which saw the partial decriminalisation of male homosexuality.

Recent screen acting roles include The Duke of Marlborough in the BAFTA-winning and Oscar-nominated _The Favourite_ (2018), Disney’s _Christopher Robin_ (2018), BBC One’s _Gunpowder_ (2017_)_, _Wolf Hall_ (2015_)_ and _Game of Thrones_ (2014-2017). He also starred opposite Anthony Hopkins and Olivia Colman in the Oscar-winning screen adaptation of Florian Zeller’s _The Father._

**Augustus Prew** has recently finished filming the title role in the film _Dear David_  for Lionsgate/BuzzFeed. He can be seen most recently in Amazon’s _Lord of the Rings_  series. He played the role of ‘Cameron’ in the Blumhouse Hulu Anthology series, _Into the Dark: Midnight Kiss_, and Mike Doyle’s film, _Sell By_. He can currently be seen on Netflix’s _Special_  and Apple’s _The Morning Show_ with Jennifer Aniston, Reese Witherspoon and Steve Carell. Augustus’s television credits include the series lead in CBS’s _Pure Genius_, the recurring guest star role of ‘Whip’ in FOX’s _Prison Break_, the title role in Mike White’s HBO pilot _Mamma Dallas_, and _The Borgias_  for Showtime. He also appeared in the role of ‘Miles’ in the Netflix film _Ibiza_, _High-Rise_ opposite Tom Hiddleston and Sienna Miller, _Klondike_ with Richard Madden, _Kick-Ass 2_ opposite Aaron Taylor-Johnson, and _Charlie St. Cloud_ opposite Zac Efron.

**Nicola Shindler OBE** is a prolific, multi award-winning British television producer, who has worked with some of the most lauded names in television and created some of its most memorable series.

With over 25 years’ experience in television, Nicola has produced some of the UK’s most successful and award-winning dramas, including _It’s a Sin_ (Ch4/ HBO), _Harlan Coben’s_ _The Stranger_ (Netflix), _Years and Years_ (BBC/HBO)_, Happy Valley_ (BBC), _Queer as Folk_ (Channel 4), _Ridley Road_ (BBC/ Masterpiece), _Traces_ (UKTV), _Last Tango in Halifax_ (BBC), _Butterfly_ (ITV)_,_ _Finding Alice_ (ITV)  and most recently _Harlan Coben’s_ _Stay Close_ for Netflix,  _No Return_ for ITV, and _Traces_ series 2 for UKTV. Forthcoming series include _Nolly_ and comedic-drama _Significant Other_ starring Katherine Parkinson and Youssef Kerkour, both for ITVX.

In 2019, Nicola was awarded an OBE and took home one of BAFTA’s highest honours, the Special Award, for her services to British Broadcasting. Prior to launching Quay Street Productions in 2021, Nicola founded RED Production Company in 1998, where she was Chief Executive for over 20 years, and she also previously served as chief executive and chief creative officer at StudioCanal UK.

**Peter Hoar** most recently directed and executive produced _It’s a Sin_, which aired on Channel 4 in January 2022 to glowing 5* reviews and had over 6.5 million viewers in its first week, making it All 4’s biggest ever drama launch.

Peter directed the pilot and finale of _The Umbrella Academy_’s first season for Netflix and has directed episodes of _Altered Carbon, Iron Fist and Daredevil_ and _The Defenders_ for Marvel/Netflix as well as two episodes of _Cloak & Dagger_ for Disney. Prior to this, Peter directed the finale of _The Last Kingdom_ and was lead director on _The Last Kingdom_ Season 2 for Carnival Films & BBC 2. He was the Co-Executive Producer/Director on Season 3 of the Starz series _Da Vinci’s Demons_, having directed 5 episodes of Season 2.

Before that, Peter launched detective drama _Shetland_ for ITV Studios/BBC, which premiered to almost 7 million viewers. He also worked with ITV Studios as lead director on crime drama _Vera_, starring Brenda Blethyn. Peter was hand-picked by _Mistresses_ co-creator SJ Clarkson to take over as the director of the UK series for the BBC and went on to launch the second season of the show.

Peter also directed the mid-season finale of _Doctor Who: A Good Man Goes to War_ which was the highest requested program on the BBC iPlayer. He directed the closing block of _Five Days II_, the sequel to the BAFTA nominated original series written by Gwyneth Hughes. Prior to that, Peter directed _Breaking the Mould_, a single film for the BBC about the discovery of penicillin starring Dominic West. Peter has also directed the opening block of the second season of _Silk_ starring Maxine Peake and Rupert Penry-Jones as well as episodes of _Spooks_ and _Wire in the Blood_.

**Boyd Hilton (chair)** is a journalist, author, TV critic and broadcaster. As well as his two day jobs of Entertainment Director of _Heat_ magazine, where he has worked since its launch in 1999, and Contributing Editor of _Empire_ magazine, Boyd also wrote the book _Inside Little Britain_ with Matt Lucas and David Walliams. He has been a regular contributor to BBC Radio 5 Live and Radio 4, reviewing television, books and films for over two decades. He is also Features Editor and contributor to sport/style/culture magazine _Circle Zero Eight_, and has written for _GQ_, _Man About Town_, _The Guardian_ and _Observer_. Boyd also co-hosts the weekly _Pilot TV_ podcast, covering cinematic television, and the _Footballistically Arsenal_ podcast, covering… Arsenal. He also frequently hosts live on-stage TV and film events, panels and Q&As for Bafta, the RTS and the BFI, ITV, BBC, Sky and many others.
<br><br>

**NOLLY**<br>
_Written by:_ Russell T Davies<br>
_Directed by:_ Peter Hoar<br>
©: ITV Studios Ltd<br>
_Production Company:_ Quay Street Productions<br>
_For:_ ITV<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Russell T Davies, Peter Hoar, Nicola Shindler<br>
_Produced by:_ Karen Lewis<br>
_Head of Production:_ Chris Leach<br>
_Line Producer:_ Rachel Jones<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Gail Stezaker<br>
_Production Manager:_ Louise Lyons<br>
_Production Co-ordinator:_ Ashley Scott<br>
_Supervising Location Manager:_ Mark O’Hanlon<br>
_Post Producer:_ Emily Brauders<br>
_Casting Director:_ Andy Pryor<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ Amanda Neal<br>
_Script Editor:_ Charlie Quinn<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Angie Pontefract<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Sam Care<br>
_A Camera Operator/Steadicam:_ Dan Nightingale<br>
_Editor:_ Sarah Brewerton<br>
_Visual Effects:_ Realtime<br>
_Production Designer:_ Ben Smith<br>
_Supervising Art Director:_ Gavin Lewis<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Annie Hardinge<br>
_Hair & Make-up Designer:_ Lin Davie<br>
_Music by:_ Blair Mowat<br>
_Sound Recordist:_ Jonathan Seale<br>
_Re-recording Mixer:_ Mark Briscoe<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Raoul Brand<br>

**Cast**<br>
Helena Bonham Carter _(Noele Gordon)_<br>
Con O’Neill _(Jack Barton)_<br>
Augustus Prew _(Tony Adams)_<br>
Mark Gatiss _(Larry Grayson)_<br>
Silvia Presente _(young Noele Gordon)_<br>
John Mackay _(John Logie Baird)_<br>
Justine Marriott, Nicholas Chambers  _(autograph hunters)_<br>
Bethany Antonia _(Poppy Ngomo)_<br>
Amy Booth-Steel _(Liz)_<br>
Sally Mason _(Beverley, props girl)_<br>
Tom Bell _(Rodney, director)_<br>
Jo Smith-Sutherland _(Sandra, P.A.)_<br>
Lloyd Griffith _(Paul Henry)_<br>
Clare Foster _(Sue Lloyd)_<br>
Antonia Bernath _(Jane Rossington)_<br>
Richard Lintern _(Ronnie Allen)_<br>
Chloe Harris _(Susan Hanson)_<br>
Dan Hagley _(Keith, floor manager)_<br>
Patrick Toomey _(announcer)_<br>
Donna Berlin _(passer-by)_<br>
Max Brown _(Michael Summerton)_<br>
Tim Wallers _(Charles Denton)_<br>
Sophie Bould _(newsreader)_<br>
Nichola June _(secretary 1)_<br>
Janet Walker _(secretary 2)_<br>
Gordon Kane _(Angus Lennie)_<br>
Nicholas Gecks _(Harold Macmillan)_<br>
Zita Sattar _(Iris Chatterjee)_<br>
Sam Dale _(Brian Badcoe)_<br>
Tom Bonington _(vicar)_<br>
Omari Douglas _(Bruce)_<br>
Rina Fatania _(Shabna)_<br>
Jacki Piper _(Barbara)_<br>
Jackie Knowles _(Linda)_<br>
Matthew Bates _(Eric)_<br>
Ryan Walker-Edwards _(conductor)_<br>

UK 2022©<br>
2x c.45 mins<br>
<br>

**IN PERSON & PREVIEWS**<br>
**Guillermo del Toro in Conversation:  Animation for All**<br>
Fri 27 Jan 18:00<br>
**Film Sounds: A Conversation between  Mark Jenkin and Peter Strickland**<br>
Sun 29 Jan 13:00<br>
**Chinese New Year: Year of the Rabbit: What About China? + intro by Hyun Jin Cho, BFI London Film Festival Programmer**<br>
Sun 5 Feb 14:30<br>
**BFI Expanded: Shifting Perspectives: A focus on Female and Non-Binary creators in XR**<br>
6-12 Feb<br>
**Mark Kermode Live in 3D at the BFI**<br>
Mon 6 Feb 18:30<br>
**UK Premiere: Blind Willow, Sleeping Woman  + intro with director Pierre Földes**<br>
Mon 6 Feb 20:45<br>
**Preview: Joyland +Q&A**<br>
Wed 8 Feb 18:00<br>
**BFI Future Film Festival**<br>
16-19 Feb<br>
**Preview: Subject + Q&A with director Camilla Hall and contributor Margaret Ratliff**<br>
Fri 17 Feb 18:10<br>
**Preview: The Strays + Q&A**<br>
Mon 20 Feb 18:15<br>

**REGULAR PROGRAMME**<br>
**Relaxed Screening:  The Hidden Fortress + intro & discussion**<br>
Mon 30 Jan 18:00<br>
**Member Picks: Sunshine**<br>
Thu 2 Feb 18:15<br>
**Seniors: The Long Memory + intro and Q&A with film historian Marcus Powell**<br>
Mon 6 Feb 14:00<br>
**Shadow + intro and discussion**<br>
Wed 8 Feb 18:20<br>
**Art in the Making: Edward Hopper + intro by Steven Foxon, Curator BFI National Archive + Night Work**<br>
Thu 9 Feb 18:30<br>
**African Odysseys: Free Renty: Lanier v. Harvard + intro and Q&A**<br>
Sat 11 Feb 14:00<br>
**Silent Cinema:  Neil Brand Presents Laurel and Hardy**<br>
Sun 12 Feb 16:00<br>
**Woman with a Movie Camera: Galentine’s Day: The Parent Trap 25th Anniversary**<br>
Mon 13 Feb 20:15<br>
**Projecting the Archive: I’ll Get You for This (aka Lucky Nick Cain) + intro by Rosie Taylor, Curatorial Archivist, BFI National Archive**<br>
Tue 21 Feb 18:20<br>
**Experimenta: Right of Way + Q&A with artists Dan Guthrie, Ufuoma Essi and Arjuna Neuman, hosted by Jonathan Ali**<br>
Thu 23 Feb 18:10<br>
**Film Wallahs: Kekee Manzil: House of Art**<br>
Fri 24 Feb 20:40<br>
**Course: Filmmaking for Artists:  Beginners Filmmaking Workshop**<br>
Sun 26 Feb 10:30-16:30<br>
**Relaxed Screening: Throne of Blood (Kumonosu-jô) + intro and discussion**<br>
Mon 27 Feb 18:15<br>
<br>

**BFI SOUTHBANK**  
Welcome to the home of great film and TV, with three cinemas and a studio, a world-class library, regular exhibitions and a pioneering Mediatheque with 1000s of free titles for you to explore. Browse special-edition merchandise in the BFI Shop.We&#39;re also pleased to offer you a unique new space, the BFI Riverfront – with unrivalled riverside views of Waterloo Bridge and beyond, a delicious seasonal menu, plus a stylish balcony bar for cocktails or special events. Come and enjoy a pre-cinema dinner or a drink on the balcony as the sun goes down.  

**BECOME A BFI MEMBER**  
Enjoy a great package of film benefits including priority booking at BFI Southbank and BFI Festivals. Join today at [**bfi.org.uk/join**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/join)  

**BFI PLAYER**  
 We are always open online on BFI Player where you can watch the best new, cult &amp; classic cinema on demand. Showcasing hand-picked landmark British and independent titles, films are available to watch in three distinct ways: Subscription, Rentals &amp; Free to view.  

See something different today on [**player.bfi.org.uk**](https://player.bfi.org.uk)  

Join the BFI mailing list for regular programme updates. Not yet registered? Create a new account at [**www.bfi.org.uk/signup**](http://www.bfi.org.uk/signup)

**Programme notes and credits compiled by the BFI Documentation Unit  
Notes may be edited or abridged  
Questions/comments? Contact the Programme Notes team by [email](mailto: prognotes@bfi.org.uk)**

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzMTIzMzg3NjBdfQ==
-->
